

Abstract—Recent years have seen the fast-diffusion of internetconnected devices and the rise of the Internet of Things (IoT) research and application area. Research works are dealing with technologies that enable the so-called things to communicate among them and with users in order to provide data and/or accomplish tasks. This scenario is posing several challenges so that more and more researchers are dealing with them. Our work deals with the definition of both machine and human understandable descriptions of things by means of ontologies in order to enable the collaboration among physical objects and IT systems. Indeed, recent works highlighted how the IoT technology may be profitably used in several scenarios in order to accompish complex tasks where physical objects are active participants. First, we extend the Semantic Sensor Network ontology defined by the W3C Semantic Sensor Networks Incubator Group with concepts and roles that describe actuators. This leads to the definition of a comprehensive Internet of Things ontology. Then, with the support from domain experts, we analyze the earthquake emergency scenario in order to define for it a domain ontology by means of adding domain-related concepts to the IoT ontology. Furthermore, we compare our work with others that use ontologies to formally describes things.

*Keywords*— Internet of Things, Ontology, Earthquake Emergency.

## I. Introduction

Since the term "Internet of Things" (IoT) was introduces by Kevin Ashton in 1999, the number of internet-connected devices had quickly increased. According to CISCO, the number of things connected to the internet exceeded the number of people on earth during 2008; furthermore, the company foresees that the number of internet-connected things will reach 50 billions in 2020. Nowadays, internet-connected devices are involved in many application domains [1]. Now, transportation and logistics, healthcare, smart environment (home, office, plant) can benefit from IoT technologies. Furthermore, the increasing number of new smart things and internet-connected devices developed by companies suggests that, in the near future, futuristic applications (such as robot taxi, city information model, and enhanced game room) will be available.

1"The Internet of Things". http://share.cisco.com/internet-of-things.html. Accessed: 2014-3-4.

Beside an exponential growing of the Internet of Things field, companies started to rethink their core activities including physical objects in their core processes [2], [3]. Indeed, whenever the Internet of Things enables the communication among physical objects and the business IT systems, such objects can be considered as active participants into the business processes of the companies [4]. For example, IoT-enabled objects such as sensors and/or actuators can provide data and/or accomplish operations may be used to execute business process tasks. This brings toward a collaboration among IT systems and physical objects.

Although many efforts have been done in order to connect physical objects to IT systems and enable a collaboration among them, several core challenges arises [5], [6]: scalability, when millions of sensors and/or actuators can be reached to accomplish a given task the amount of information that a system has to manage could be unmanageable; deep heterogeneity, things are very heterogeneous, both regarding physical characteristics and data and/or operations that they provide and/or accomplish, this hinders the use of them in an IoT ecosystem; unknown topology, networks of things may be large and/or things may be unreachable; incomplete or innaccurate metadata, metadata may be used to enrich the description of things and their capabilities but they could be incomplete or inaccurate; and conflict resolution, regarding actuators, conflicts may arise, for instance, when multiple applications attempt to actuate the same device. Furthermore, it is noteworthy the fact that IoT end users are usually non-technical people [7], [3]. They are not experts of the IoT-related technologies, but they know very well the domain of application of the things. An IoT ecosystem should enable these users to use devices even if they do not know IoT implementation details. In order to deal with these challenges, several research works deal with the extension of things descriptions with semantic informations by means of ontologies. Indeed, an ontology is "an explicit specification of a conceptualization" [8] and it is suitable to formally describe a domain of interest, the Internet of Things domain in this case. Ontologies are key elements of the semantic web technologies [9] and were introduced to add semantic machine-understandable information to data on the web, enabling the so-called Web 3.0 [10]. Semantic enriched data can improve search and integration activities; furthermore, they also facilitate the machine capability to reason on data in order to achieve more knowledge of the domain of interest.

Motivations that enabled the use of ontologies on the web lead to utilization of them in the Internet of Things domain on which both systems (mainly, sensors and actuators) and data may be semantically described. In particular, using ontologies things and their capabilities may be modeled at an abstract level which enables non-technical people in using them.

Our work proposes an ontology for Internet of Things in order to deal with the deep heterogeneity challenge of IoT introduced before. Indeed, in order to enable the collaboration among several physical obtects and IT systems, it is needed a common meaning of the involved resources and this can be obtained using semantics [11].

We designed an ontology whose goals are the description of an Internet of Things ecosystem. Starting from the work of the W3C Semantic Sensor Networks Incubator Group [11] on semantic sensor networks, we define an ontology that extends sensors description defined by the Incubator Group with a description suitable for actuators. A third part of the IoT ontology is domain related. In particular, we adopt the earthquake emergency evaluation and response domain as domain of interest of our ontology. The goal is to show how the developed ontology may be used to model the things that are involved in the earthquake emergencies.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II gives an overview of the works that combine Internet of Things with semantics. Section III describes the Internet of Things ontology we propose, focusing on its three-modules architecture and the modeling of sensors and actuators. Next, Section IV completes the description of the ontology depicting a domain-specific ontology suitable for the earthquake emergency evaluation and response. Section V briefly gives information about the implementation of ontologies. Finally, Section VI closes the paper with a discussion on our approach to the semantic Internet of Things and gives a prevision of the future work.

## II. RELATED WORK

In the recent years, Internet of Things attracted many researchers. Indeed, due to its pervasiveness and the variety of involved technologies, Internet of Things interests several application areas, resulting in a great number of works in literature. Regarding collaboration, for example, researchers proposed standards that enable the syntactic interoperability among things [12], [13], [14]. Despite that, the formal modeling of things by means of semantics is still an emerging area and there not exists a de facto standard to do that. This obstructs the collaboration among things themselves and among things and IT systems [11]. This leads research groups

to propose their own approaches to semantically describes the Internet of Things domain.

De et al. [15] suggest a service modeling of things using ontologies extendig the Entity, Resource, Service, and Device core elements [16] of a thing model. The W3C Semantic Sensor Network Incubator Group [11] defines an ontology for sensor networks. Such ontology goes deep in the description of devices that are capable to sense features of interest. This work represents a comprehensive description of sensors and the approach is domain independent. Hachem et al. [6] aim at solving the IoT challenges by means of three ontologies that describe in detail devices and physics of the domain of interest. Their work proposes a three-layer view of the IoT-based real world. In detail, the authors identify the following layers: a physical layer, an information layer, and a functional layer. For each of them they design a specific ontology in order to give a proper description of the IoT domain. In this work, some aspects of the information and the functional layers are noteworthy. Indeed, in the respective ontologies there are concepts that rely on reasoning about measurement units and physical concept relations, and they are defined from a mathematical viewpoint. This simplify the searching for and composing of data activities. Wang et al. [7] propose an ontology-based framework to support the discovery and invocation of actuators in home care systems. The goal of their work is to simplify the customization of the home care system policies by non-technical people. A care professional may declare system rules by means of human-understandable concepts defined in a care domain ontology. Then, software handlers are responsible for the translation between ontology-based and device-specific descriptions of sensors and actuators used by the home care system. Discovery and invocation of actuators are supported by querying the system knowledge base on which each device is registered. In a further work, Wang et al. [17] define an ontology for the IoT. Such an ontology aims at giving a comprehensive view on the IoT domain, from sensing and actuating capabilities to the quality of services and information. For this purpose, and in order to keep distinct each area of IoT domain, the description ontology is designed with a modular approach. Each module is responsible for one of the IoT-related areas (e.g., resources, services, QoS) and, in some cases, it is developed starting by and extending third party works on IoT. In this work, a particular attention is given to IoT service modeling and testing, but it overlooks how this ontology may be applied in real world scenarios.

Finally, some considerations have to be done about the domain of application we consider and the related work which deals with it. Emergency management involves many organizations and actors, from national agencies to volunteers. Furthermore, recent works also highlights that citizens may contribute in generating useful data in such mass casualty incidents [18]. It emerges a complex scenario where a large amount of data has to be processed and combined in order to

better manage the emergency. For this purpose, several works propose the use of ontologies to add semantic information to data and processes involved in the emergency management activities [19], [20]. Despite that, the majority of them does not consider sensors and actuators in the domain ontologies. Thus, our work appear to consider another aspect of the emergency scenario: the things.

## III. THE IOT ONTOLOGY

The following section describes the architecture of the Internet of Things ontology we propose. Such architecture is composed by three modules, namely Sensors Module, Actuators Module, and Domain Module, divided in two layers (Figure 1). On one hand, the first layer contains Sensors and Actuators modules and formally describes both sensors and actuators in an IoT ecosystem by means of two ontologies, one for sensors and one for actuators. On the other hand the second layer contains the Domain Module. It details the generic descriptions of things given by the first layer adding ontology elements that describe specific-domain devices and features of interest involved in the application scenario, in this case the earthquake emergency evaluation and response scenario. This modular two-layers architecture provides both flexibility and compatibility of the whole ontology: all the specific-domain concepts and roles can be added to the Domain Module without requiring the modification of other modules; furthermore, in order to describe the domain scenario, other ontologies may be used in the domain-related layer without violating the whole IoT ontology design principles.

Image /page/2/Picture/3 description: A block diagram illustrating the components of an "IoT Ontology". The diagram consists of a large, light gray, rounded rectangle labeled "IoT Ontology" at the top. Inside this main rectangle, there are three smaller, light blue, rounded rectangles. The top half of the main rectangle contains two of these smaller rectangles placed side-by-side. The one on the left is labeled "Sensor" and the one on the right is labeled "Actuator". Below these two, a single, wider, light blue rectangle spans the bottom half of the main container and is labeled "Domain".

Figure 1. Internet of Things ontology architecture.

In the following, we illustrate the three modules of the ontology.

### A. Sensor Module

This module is responsible for the description of sensors. Since our work aims at the compatibility with other ontology implementations, we decided to use the ontology designed by the W3C Semantic Sensor Network Incubator Group *et al.* [11] to semantically describe the sensors. This ontology uses the *Stimulus-Sensor-Observation pattern* [21] as starting point to define the description of sensors. According to such pattern: a stimulus is a change or a state in an environment that a sensor can detect and use to measure a property; a sensor is anything that senses and, usually, it consists in an object that observes, transforming incoming stimuli into

another representation; then, an observation is the result of a measurement operation and connects a stimulus that a sensor measures and the sensor that observes such stimulus, it focuses on a single measurement that a sensor takes at a precise instant and in a precise location. By means of this pattern and the definition of the three related core concepts, the W3C Semantic Sensor Network Incubator Group designed the ontology for the semantic sensor networks. The above pattern may be analyzed through four different perspectives which are shown in the following.

Sensor Perspective. It describes the property the sensor measures (ssn:Property) and how (ssn:Sensing and ssn:Stimulus) measurement taken. Furthermore, this perspective deals with sensor capabilities (ssn:MeasurementProperty) in terms of accuracy (ssn:Accuracy), resolution (ssn:Resolution), (ssn:Precision), and other similar sensor characteristics. These characteristics are related to particular conditions (ssn:Condition), consequently several measurement capabilities (ssn:MeasurementCapability) can be associated with each sensor.

System Perspective. It focuses on the platform (ssn:Platform) description. In the semantic sensor network, a system (ssn:System) may be composed by several subsystems (ssn:hasSubSystem). Furthermore, each sensing device must be considered a system as well (ssn:SensingDevice ⊑ ssn:Device ⊑ ssn:System). This allows the description of complex platforms on which several sensors are aggregated in a single device. Finally, each system has its own operating range (ssn:OperatingRange) and survival range (ssn:SurvivalRange).

Feature and Property Perspective. This perspective focuses on the properties (ssn:Property) that may be sensed and the related observations that are related to them. Properties are grouped in features of interest (ssn:FeatureOfInterest) that represents homogeneous collections.

Observation Perspective. Finally, the fourth perspective proposed by W3C SSN Incubator Group deals with observations and related metadata. Observations are taken by means of a sensor (ssn:Sensor) at a certain moment, measuring a stimulus (ssn:Stimulus), using a sensing method (ssn:Sensing), and observing a property (ssn:Property) of a particular feature of interest (ssn:FeatureOfInterest). The result of the observation corresponds to the output of the sensor (ssn:SensorOutput).

### B. Actuator Module

At the best of our knowledge, there not exist generic purpose ontologies for actuators networks; as a consequence, we propose a new ontology of which goal is the modeling of actuators networks at a generic description level. leaving apart the domain-related details. Our ontology is based on the work of the W3C Semantic Sensor Network Incubator Group described above and uses several concepts defined in the SSN ontology. Reasons for this choice rely on the compatibility, the the high level of flexibility, and the level of standardization of that ontology. Taking advantage of the SSN ontology and extending it, we propose the Semantic Actuator Network ontology (SAN ontology) (Figure 2) that formally describes concepts regarding actuators.

In the architecture of our Internet of Things ontology, the Semantic Actuator Network constitutes the actuator module. In conjunction with the SSN ontology it gives a comprehensive formalization for the representation of a thing network. Thus, by means of those two ontology, we can model any complex device composed by sensors and actuators.

As SSN proposes the Sensor-Stimulus-Observation pattern in order to describe how a sensing activity works, we propose the *Actuator-Stimulus-Operation pattern* in order to describe the actuators. According to this pattern, an Actuator is an object capable to modify a property in the environment where it operates. To do that, it produces a Stimulus that is able to modify a property. Finally, an Operation represents the activity that is accomplished by the actuator.

In order to better describe the proposed pattern, similarly to the the description of SSN ontology, we define two perspectives as follows.

Actuator Perspective. This perspective gives a static description of the actuator and highlights the properties that the actuator may manage and/or modify. Similarly to the sensor perspective, this perspective also defines actuator specifications. An actuator (san:Actuator) is able to modify a property (ssn:Property) by means of generating a stimulus (ssn:Stimulus). In this case, a stimulus is the change that an actuator may actuate (san:models) in order to modify (san:modify) a property. It is worthy of note that a stimulus does not necessarily refers to the property that the actuator modifies. For instance, let us consider an electric motor as actuator. The property that we want to manage is its rotational speed. In order to modify it, we vary the rotor current that, in this case, is the stimulus on which the actuator acts. Furthermore, the actuator implements (san:implements) an acting process (san:Acting  $\square$  ssn:Process) that describes the process implemented by the actuator in order to manage the property of interest. As described for the sensors, in order to describe the actuator working specifications we define the change property concept (san:ChangePropery ≡ ssn:MeasurementProperty), related with properties (such as ssn:Accuracy, ssn:Resolution, etcetera) defined in the SSN ontology. Furthermore the concept san:ChangeCapability is defined. It links (ssn:inCondition) a set of working specifications with a specific condition (ssn:Condition).

Operation Perspective. It provides the dynamic description of actuators. Indeed, it focuses on the operation (san:Operation) that a given actuator accomplishes in a given instant (san:operationResultTime). The operation is accomplished (san:operatedBy) by an actuator in order to modify (san:controlledProperty) a property of a specific feature of interest (san:featureOfInterest). Then, this perspective defines both the stimulus that the actuators receives and the method it uses (san:actingMethodUsed). Obviously, the operation is related with the result we want to obtain. Such result is the actuator input (san:ActuatorInput) since it consists on the information on which depends the property modification that is desired. Returning to the above example of the electric motor, the new value of the rotational speed is the input of the actuator.

Both the *System perspective* and the *Feature and Property perspective* can be defined for the SAN ontology, as well. On the other hand, such perspectives have already been defined in the SSN ontology. Therefore, regarding the *System perspetive*, we simply introduced a concept to model an acting device (san:ActingDevice  $\sqsubseteq$  san:Actuator, ssn:Device) and define its relations with ssn:Device. As a consequence, according to our IoT ontology (obtained without modifying the SSN ontology), a system is a platform that may include both sensors and actuators. Regarding the *Feature and Property perspective*, no extensions are required since features of interest and properties are the same described for the SSN ontology. The only difference is that features and properties must be changed by actuators instead of being observed by sensors.

### C. Domain Module

The domain module is responsible for the description of domain-specific things. Since it uses the Sensors and Actuators modules in order to define its own concepts and relations, we choosed to create a second layer for it in the our IoT ontology architecture. By means of it, the resulting architecture is flexible and ontology designers may focus on the specific application domain without taking care of the complex structures of the ontologies for sensors and actuators, but only using their concepts to define the new ones required by the domain of interest. The next section illustrates an example for the earthquake emergency evaluation and response domain.

## IV. THE IOT EARTHQUAKE ONTOLOGY

Several works deal with the use of semantics in the emergency management fields (e.g., see [19], [20]). Nevertheless, they usually do not focus on "things" that are involved in the emergency domain. Here, we propose the *Earthquake Emergency (EEM) ontology* that formally models sensors and actuators, the former used to evaluate the earthquake entity and the latter used to respond to the emergency. In order to design and develop this ontology, we

Image /page/4/Figure/0 description: A concept map or ontology diagram illustrating relationships between various entities, primarily centered around an 'Actuator'. The diagram uses rounded rectangles for concepts and labeled arrows for relationships. Concepts in green include 'ActingDevice', 'Actuator', 'Acting', 'ActuatorInput', 'OperationValue', 'Operation', 'ChangeCapability', and 'ChangeProperty'. Concepts in blue include 'Device', 'Stimulus', 'Process', 'Property', 'FeatureOfInterest', 'Condition', 'Accuracy', 'Resolution', and a box with ellipses. Solid lines indicate 'is a' relationships: 'ActingDevice' is a 'Device', 'Acting' is a 'Process', and 'ChangeProperty' is a 'Property'. 'Accuracy', 'Resolution', and others are types of 'ChangeProperty'. Dashed lines represent other relationships. An 'Actuator' is connected to a 'Device', 'implements some' 'Acting', 'models only' a 'Stimulus', is 'operatedBy only' an 'Operation', and 'hasChangeCapability only' a 'ChangeCapability'. An 'Operation' is linked to 'Actuator' ('operatedBy'), 'Acting' ('actingMethodUsed'), 'Stimulus' ('includesEvent'), 'Property' ('controlledProperty'), 'FeatureOfInterest', and 'ActuatorInput' ('operationDesiredResult'). A 'Property' is modified by 'Acting', is a proxy for 'Stimulus', and has a 'FeatureOfInterest'.

Figure 2. The Semantic Actuator Network ontology (the light blue concepts belong to SSN).

benefited from the help of earthquake domain experts: we consulted civil engineers that work in this kind of emergency and interviewed them to get a proper overview over the sensors and actuators involved in this scenario.

In our domain analysis, we first identify five features of interest and related properties<sup>2</sup> (Figure 3):

- emergency site (eem:SiteFeature) that has ground acceleration and the displacement the properties (eem:SiteAccelerationProperty and as eem:SiteDisplacementProperty);
- earthquake (eem:EarthquakeFeature) magnitudo, the epicenter, and the distance the has (eem:EarthquakeMagnitudoProperty, eem:EarthquakeDistanceProperty, eem:EarthquakeEpicenterProperty);
- the evaluation of cracks (eem:CrackFeature) that has their widths as property (eem:CrackWidthProperty);
- the localization (eem:LocalizationFeature) that latitude-longitude pair as property eem:GPSLocalizationProperty);
- the alarm (eem:AlarmFeature) that aims at notifying people of the earthquake entity and of additional information in order to reach a safe place (denoted by properties such as eem:AlarmNotificationProperty, eem:AlarmLightProperty, and eem:AlarmSoundProperty).

Image /page/4/Figure/10 description: A line of black text on a white background, which appears to be a citation. The text reads: "²See http://earthquake.usgs.gov/learn/glossary/. Accessed: 2014-3-3." The number '2' at the beginning is a superscript.

Image /page/4/Figure/11 description: A diagram illustrating a conceptual model or ontology, organized into three main columns connected by arrows indicating relationships. The first column, on the left, is titled 'FeatureOf Interest' in a light green box. Below it, a vertical line with 'is a' connects to a list of light blue boxes: 'SiteFeature', 'Earthquake Feature', 'CrackFeature', 'Localization Feature', and 'AlarmFeature'. The middle column has a light green box labeled 'Property'. Below it, a list of light blue boxes are all connected to 'Property' with arrows labeled 'is a'. These boxes are: 'Site Acceleration Property', 'Site Displacement Property', 'Earthquake Distance Property', 'Epicenter Property', 'Magnitudo Property', 'Crack Width Property', 'GPS Localization Property', 'AlarmNotification Property', 'AlarmLight Property', and 'AlarmSound Property'. The third column, on the right, is titled 'Quantity Kind' in a yellow box. Below it, a vertical line with 'is a' connects to a list of yellow boxes: 'Acceleration', 'Distance', 'Geographic Coordinates', 'Magnitudo', and 'Dimensionless'. Dashed arrows labeled 'hasProperty' connect features from the first column to their corresponding properties in the second column. For example, 'SiteFeature' has properties 'Site Acceleration Property' and 'Site Displacement Property'. Solid arrows connect properties from the second column to their quantity kinds in the third column. For example, 'Site Acceleration Property' points to 'Acceleration', and 'Epicenter Property' points to 'Geographic Coordinates'.

The Earthquake Emergency Management ontology: Features of Interest and Properties (green concepts belong to SSN, yellow concepts belong to QU).

We used the *Quantities Kinds and Units ontology* (QU)<sup>3</sup>

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>3</sup>"Library for Quantity Kinds and Units: schema, based on QUDV model OMG SysML(TM), Version 1.2", http://purl.org/NET/ssnx/qu/qu\#. Accessed: 2013-11-23.

to represent units of measurement of such properties. This ontology defines two main concepts: qu:QuantityKind denotes the kind of the measurement, and qu:Unit denotes the unit of measurement. The two concepts are linked through the property qu:unitKind. In EEM, the properties we defined extend (is-a) both ssn:Property and qu:QuantityKind. In this manner, we can specify the unit of measurement for each property. Furthermore, as some units of measurement we need are not defined in QU, we directly added them in EEM. For instance, we introduced the magnitudo (eem:Magnitudo) and the geographic coordinates (eem:GeographicCoordinates).

After property identification, we analyzed the devices involved in the earthquake emergency scenario (see Figure 4).

We identify the following sensing devices: the fissurometer (eem:Fissurometer) that measures the width of cracks; the seismometer (eem:Seismometer), the accelerometer (eem:Accelerometer), and the GPS (eem:GPS), they all are needed to evaluate an earthquake; the seismograph station (eem:SeismographStation), that is composed by the previous three sensors; and the seismograph network (eem:SeismographNetwork), that is composed by three seismograph stations at least and is used to evaluate the earthquake epicenter. Then, we identify the following actuators: the alarm siren (eem:AlarmSiren) that informs people to evacuate a building; the signaling escape light (eem:SignalingEscapeLight) that highlights the escape path during a building evacuation; and, finally, the alarm message notifier (eem:AlarmMessageNotifier) that sends information about safe places after an earthquake to citizens' mobile devices.

## V. IMPLEMENTATION

As mentioned above, our IoT ontology is composed by three main ontologies: the Semantic Sensor Network (SSN) and the Semantic Actuator Network (SAN) ontologies describe the infrastructure of a network of things, whereas the Earthquake Emergency Management (EEM) ontology describes the domain of interest we evaluate in this work. We implemented the last two ontologies using the OWL 2 language [22]. It results in two files, san.owl and eem.owl, that define respectively the SAN ontology and the EEM ontology. These files are available at the following URL: https://bitbucket.org/gilbertotcc/iot-ontology.

## VI. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

This work proposes an ontology for Internet of Things extending the ontology for semantic sensor networks developed by the W3C Semantic Sensor Network Incubator Group and applies it to the earthquake emergency domain.

Although several works deal with semantic description of things, we focus on flexibility and compatibility proposing

a three modules ontology in two layers: one dealing with a generic model for the things and one dealing with specific-domain things. Indeed, De et al. [15] gave a detailed description of things but their approach is oriented to the users of those devices and do not focus on modeling such sensors and actuators as, for example, the Semantic Sensor Network ontology [11] does about sensors. Instead, our work extends the SSN ontology and proposes a detailed description model for the actuators too. The work by Hachem et al. [6] shows an interesting analysis of the IoT domain and proposes an ontology composed by three modules. Their work focuses on the combination of things, not only on their description, up to include the mathematical laws involved in the domain. This goes beyond the goals of our work which deals only with devices and physics of the domain of interest. In our opinions, our approach results more easy to learn for end users of the ontology. In comparison with the work of Wang et al. [7], our approach is more flexible. Due to its modularity, the ontology we propose is not domain specific but is suitable for each scenario on which things are involved. The work proposed by Wang et al. [17] shows a comprehensive description of the IoT domain which includes also services and testing areas and it goes beyond the goal of our work, as well. Furthermore, their work does not show any example and/or case study in order to evaluate differences with our approach.

In conclusion, our work represents a starting point to the development of an Internet of Things ontology also suitable for users, adding a semantic description for thing interfaces. By adding a semantic description to the physical objects, such ontology eases the collaboration among several physical objects such as sensors and actuators that use different communication protocols and data formats. At the moment, it is a comprehensive ontology to deeply describe both sensors and actuators. Furthermore, its architecture enables domain-specialists to build every domain ontology they need using the top layer of our IoT ontology offering a high level of flexibility.

