
#### **ARSTRACT**

The ongoing trend of warming climate has made Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) a major cryospheric hazard worldwide, especially in the Himalayas. GLOFs in the Himalayan region are mostly caused by moraine-dammed proglacial lakes and icedammed lakes. These sporadic disasters have resulted in significant loss of life and property. This study offers a comprehensive analysis of the GLOF hazard potential of a potentially dangerous proglacial lake (PDGL) in the Ladakh region. This research explores the GLOF threat from the lake using multi-criteria analysis and advanced 2D hydrodynamic modeling approaches. The mass balance response of the mother glacier, its flow dynamics, and glacier-lake interactions were examined for the past 22 years. The findings show that over this period, the PDGL has had a notable expansion of 78.7%, accompanied by a significant recession of 13.2% in its feeding glacier. The glacier has witnessed an average thickness loss of  $\sim$ 7 m at the rate of 0.32 m  $a^{-1}$  during this period. The average, lowest, and maximum depth of the glacier were found to be 30.95, 14.30, and 50.57 m, respectively and the average velocity of the glacier was estimated as 3.38 m a<sup>-1</sup>. Because of the lake's rapid expansion and steep surrounding slopes, it was classified as a high-hazard lake. The risk to the downstream community was assessed through 2D hydrodynamic modeling using the HEC-RAS tool. The maximum discharge under the worst-case scenario for the piping and overtopping failures was estimated as 3890.99 m<sup>3</sup> s<sup>-1</sup> and 5111.39 m<sup>3</sup> s<sup>-1</sup>, respectively. The area potentially under the threat of inundation was calculated to be 4.74 and 5.38 km<sup>2</sup> for the moderate and worst-case scenarios respectively. The expected maximum flood velocities range from 18.26 to 23.78 meters, respectively for the moderate and worst-case scenarios. At several locations in the downstream area, routed hydrographs representing the GLOF propagation were generated. The findings show that the flood wave in the worst-case scenario

#### **ARTICLE HISTORY**

Received 5 June 2024 Accepted 3 October 2024

#### **KEYWORDS**

GLOF; glacial lake expansion; risk assessment; HECRAS, Ladakh region; Western Himalayas; Panikhar, Kargil would arrive at the first settlement in  $50\,\text{min}$ , with a peak velocity of  $12.36\,\text{m s}^{-1}$ . The potentially inundated area includes critical infrastructure such as bridges, residential houses, and roads. To mitigate the potential risk associated with this lake, a more detailed and on-site study is highly recommended.

# 1. Introduction

In most glaciated parts of the world, the effects of climate change have resulted in ongoing glacier recession and the formation of glacial lakes behind recently exposed unstable moraines (Zemp et al. 2009; Bolch et al. 2012; Nie et al. 2017). Mountain settlements in the Himalayas, where numerous such glacial lakes are created, are seriously at risk from glacial lake outburst floods (Clague and Mathews 1973; Ding and Liu 1992; Ahmed 2024). Glacial lake outburst floods (GLOFs) are catastrophic occurrences that take place when a glacial lake, impounded by a glacier or moraine, breaks, releasing a significant amount of water and debris downstream causing flash floods in the downstream area, ruining crops, damaging infrastructure like bridges and hydropower plants, and resulting in fatalities. The majority of these flood episodes are linked to processes like dam breach creation and subsequent damming moraine failure (Richardson and Reynolds 2000; Emmer and Vilímek 2013; Worni et al. 2014). The possible triggers of a GLOF event may be glacial calving activity at the lake terminus (Zhang et al. 2020), snow or ice avalanches (Schaub et al. 2016), landslides, extreme weather events (Schmidt et al. 2020) like cloudbursts (Bhambri et al. 2016) or seismic activity (Kargel et al. 2016). These events are potent threats whose effects can reach distances of more than 100 km in the downstream region (Richardson and Reynolds 2000).

GLOFs pose a threat to about 15 million people globally and the most prominent high-vulnerability zone is the Himalayan region followed by the Andes (Taylor et al. 2023). Due to the Himalayan terrain's steep slopes and constrained flow pathways, GLOF episodes have typically been described as being particularly catastrophic (Mool 1995; Reynolds 1998; Richardson and Reynolds 2000; Worni et al. 2013). The recent Kedarnath disaster in the Central Himalayas in June 2013, which was brought on by unrelenting rain and subsequent eruption of the Chorabari glacial lake, serves as an illustration of the degree of fatality these occurrences can bring about (Das et al. 2015; Allen et al. 2016). The increased GLOF hazard in the region requires rigorous research initiatives for the identification and monitoring of hazardous glacial lakes in this region. Given that most of the glacial lakes in the Himalayas are inaccessible because of its tough terrain and harsh climate, remote sensing methods are used to monitor these lakes through time and space. Numerous studies have been conducted in the past to evaluate the distribution and GLOF hazard of glacial lakes throughout the world, especially in the Himalaya, which includes countries like Nepal, Tibet, Bhutan, and India (Bajracharya et al. 2007; Bolch et al. 2008; Fujita et al. 2009; Ives et al. 2010; Shrestha et al. 2010; Raj et al. 2013; Rounce et al. 2017; Emmer et al. 2018; Jiang et al. 2018; Nie et al. 2018; Byers et al. 2018; Emmer et al. 2020; Ashraf et al. 2021; Ahmed et al. 2022a, 2022b; Banerjee and Bhuiyan 2023).

The Himalayan region, hence, has been the most well-known case for GLOF disaster risk studies. In the central Himalayas, a GLOF hazard vulnerability study by the International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD), highlighted some priority sites for GLOF risk mitigation. The study mapped 1,947 glacial lakes using data from the Global Land Ice Measurement from Space (GLIMS) program, of which 835 were deemed dangerous because of their locations upstream of populated areas and major roadways. The study showed that Nepal urgently needs to reduce GLOF danger, especially in the regions downstream of the 835 little glacial lakes (Bajracharya et al. 2007). Rounce et al. (2017) evaluated the risk presented by GLOFs in Nepal using satellite data from 2000 to 2015 and the previous GLOF data. The risk connected to each lake was estimated by combining the hazard and projected downstream effects. The results reported 31 high-risk lakes and 11 very high-risk lakes.

For the Upper Indus River basin, Gupta et al. (2021) conducted an assessment of potentially hazardous glacial lakes identifying 20 and 48 high-risk lakes for two different GLOF scenarios respectively. The evolving status and potential consequences of glacier lakes and the GLOF threat in the Hindu Kush Himalaya region were studied by Ashraf et al. (2021). An overall increase of 26% in the number of glacial lakes was found from 2001 to 2013 and 36 lakes were characterized as potentially dangerous. The increased risk posed by GLOFs in the context of a warming climate is highlighted, along with the necessity for proactive monitoring, risk assessment, and adaptation measures. From an Indian perspective, Jammu and Kashmir has the highest cumulative degree of GLOF hazard, followed by Uttarakhand, Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim, Himachal Pradesh, and Arunachal Pradesh (Mal et al. 2021). Dubey and Goyal (2020) also placed J&K in second place, only after Sikkim, concerning the GLOF threat. Ahmed et al. (2022) analyzed the GLOF hazard scenario in the Jhelum basin using remote sensing and GIS and identified 21 potentially dangerous and 7 highly hazardous lakes.

Studies focusing on individual glacial lakes have also been conducted in all parts of the Himalayan region. Majeed et al. (2021) reconstructed the 2014 Gya glacial lake outburst flood in Ladakh using the hydrodynamic model HEC-RAS and the results revealed the possible cause of the GLOF to be the piping failure. The study also predicted the possibility of 5 times more severe GLOF in the future from the lake. Mir et al. (2018) evaluated the GLOF risk of Dalung and Padam lakes in the Zanskar Valley using the Mike 11 model. The results declared both the lakes as potentially dangerous and susceptible to GLOFs of significant intensities. Sattar et al. (2021) analyzed the GLOF potential of Lower Barun glacial lake in Sikkim Himalayas and the lake was found to be susceptible to GLOF in case of a strong triggering event. Ahmed et al. (2023) estimated the risk associated with the Gangabal lake in Kashmir Himalayas using the HEC-RAS model. The results indicate that the lake has the potential to generate a peak discharge of 16,601.03 m<sup>3</sup>/s in the worst-case scenario at the time of a GLOF event. Rawat et al. (2023a) assessed a PDGL in the Satluj River basin in India and reported an areal expansion from 0.11 to 0.26 km<sup>2</sup> over the past 28 years from 1990 to 2018 and high GLOF risk. Sattar et al. (2019) conducted the moraine breach modeling of the South Lhonak lake in Sikkim and declared the lake to be highly vulnerable to GLOF, owing to its alarming rate of expansion over the

past few decades and a loosely consolidated moraine dam. This very lake witnessed a severe GLOF disaster on October 4, 2023, killing at least 40 people and destroying public infrastructure in its downstream area. Similar studies have been conducted far and wide in the Himalayas that focus on predictive GLOF modeling of hazardous glacial lakes (Emmer and Vilímek 2013; Haemmig et al. 2014; Klimeš et al. 2014; Round et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2018, Sattar et al. 2019; Hussain et al. 2020; Majeed et al. 2021; Sattar et al. 2021; Ahmed et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022; Gouli et al. 2023; Das et al. 2024; Schmidt et al., 2020) etc.

The present study is one such attempt at understanding the GLOF hazard risk associated with a rapidly expanding moraine-dammed glacial lake in the Ladakh region of the Western Himalayas using multi-criteria decision analysis and 2D GLOF modeling. The identified PDGL is situated above the Panikhar and Pranti villages in the Kargil district of Ladakh. This study focused on the following objectives. (1) Studying the glacier-lake interactions of the Panikhar glacier and glacial lake for the past 22 years (2) Estimating the mass balance, ice thickness, and surface velocity of the Panikhar glacier, (3) Assessing the GLOF hazard level of the lake and associated risk to the downstream community using geospatial analysis and hydrodynamic modeling.

# 2. Study area

The glacial lake under investigation in this study is situated above the Panikhar and Pranti villages of the Kargil district in the Suru River catchment of the Western Himalayas. This lake is located between 34°2′2.154″N latitude and 75°46′59.172″E longitude, 4062 meters above sea level while its mother glacier lies, in close proximity, to its West (Figure 1). The Suru catchment is drained by the Suru River which flows through Kargil district and subsequently joins the Indus as its left bank tributary. The total catchment area is 4408 km² and the elevation range is from 2588 masl to 7047 masl. The mother glacier of the lake (GLIMS ID: G075817E34034N) is situated in the southwest of the Suru River catchment at a distance of about 15 kilometers from the well-known Parkachik glacier. The glacial lake or its mother glacier has not been identified with any specific names in previous literature. Because of this, we have given them the names of the village that is closest to them: Panikhar Glacier and Glacial Lake. The Panikhar village is situated about 13 kilometers downstream in the North-East of the glacier-lake complex and is vulnerable to potential GLOF events from the lake.

## 2.1. Glacial geomorphology

Panikhar glacier is oriented in the West-East direction and the lake is proglacially located close to its snout at its eastern side. The ablation zone of the glacier exhibits a bend towards the northeast according to the local geomorphology. The elevation of the glacial valley ranges from 5500 to 4100 meters above sea level (masl) and the glacial lake is situated at a height of 4100 masl. The contour lines clearly show that the steep slope to the northwest of the glacial lake is prone to landslides and snow

Image /page/5/Figure/3 description: A figure titled "Figure 1. Location map of the Panikhar glacier, its proglacial lake and Panikhar village." The figure is composed of several maps and photographs. In the top left, two maps show the location of the study area within India and the region of Jammu & Kashmir. The main map in the top center is a topographic map of the Suru Catchment, with elevations ranging from a low of 2588m to a high of 7047m. This map includes a legend for the Glacial lake, Panikhar Glacier, Suru Catchment, and River Streams. To the right of this map are three photographs: one showing icebergs floating on the lake's surface, a full view of the lake, and a view of the Moraine Dam. The bottom half of the figure is a large Landsat 8 satellite image from October 2022. This image details the Panikhar Glacier, the glacial lake, the downstream flowpath, and Panikhar Village, which are outlined and labeled. A legend for this satellite image indicates that the RGB channels correspond to Band\_5 (Red), Band\_4 (Green), and Band\_3 (Blue).

Figure 1. Location map of the Panikhar glacier, its proglacial lake and Panikhar village.

avalanches, which might catalyze a GLOF. The glacial lake is impounded by the glacier's terminal moraine and the Panikhar settlement lies 13 km northeast of the glacial lake (Figure 2).

# 3. Datasets

This study used Sentinel-2A (10 m), PlanetScope (3 m), Landsat TM (30 m), Landsat ETM+ (30 m), and Landsat OLI (30 m) for the mapping of glacial lake and its mother glacier and estimating area changes in the glacial lake and its feeding glacier from 2000 to 2022. Moreover, high-resolution Google imagery was also used for verification and validation purposes. Advanced Land Observing Satellite (ALOS) Phased Array Synthetic-Aperture Radar (PALSAR) radiometrically terrain corrected (RTC) Digital Elevation Model (DEM) was downloaded online from https://asf.alaska.edu (accessed on 23rd May 2023), from which topographic information such as elevation, slope, aspect, hill shade, etc. was obtained. Furthermore, ASTER DEM (30 m) was

Image /page/6/Figure/1 description: A topographical map showing the glacial geomorphology of the Panikhar glacier. The map includes latitude and longitude lines, with longitude ranging from 75°47'0"E to 75°51'0"E and latitude from 34°1'0"N to 34°3'0"N. A scale bar indicates a range up to 2.25 km. The map displays contour lines with elevations from 4100 to 5800 meters. A legend defines the symbols used on the map: a black outline for Glacial Valley, a thin line for Contour line, light blue shading for Panikhar glacier, darker blue for Glacial lake, a red triangle for U shaped valley, a green asterisk for Cirque, a purple diamond for Roche moutainee, a red dashed line for Lateral moraines, and a thick black-and-white dashed line for Terminal moraine. The map illustrates the glacier, a glacial lake, and the locations of these various geomorphological features. An inset map in the bottom right corner shows a satellite image of the same area.

Figure 2. Glacial geomorphology of the study area.

Table 1. Datasets used in the study.

| S. No | Data/Tool               | Resolution | Year                   | Source                                                    |
|-------|-------------------------|------------|------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|
| 1.    | Planet CubeSat          | 3m         | 2016, 2018, 2020, 2022 | Planet<br>https://www.planet.com/                         |
| 2.    | Landsat 7 ETM+          | 30 m       | 2000, 2010             | USGS Earth Explorer<br>http://www.earthexplorer.usgs.gov  |
| 3.    | Landsat 8 OLI           | 30 m       | 2022                   | USGS Earth Explorer<br>http://www.earthexplorer.usgs.gov  |
| 4.    | Sentinel 2 A            | 10 m       | 2016, 2018, 2020, 2022 | USGS Earth Explorer<br>http://www.earthexplorer.usgs.gov/ |
| 5.    | ALOS-PALSAR<br>DEM      | 12.5 m     | 2015                   | https://asf.alaska.edu/                                   |
| 6.    | SRTM DEM                | 90 m       | 2000                   | USGS Earth Explorer<br>http://www.earthexplorer.usgs.gov/ |
| 7.    | ASTER DEM               | 30 m       | 2022                   | https://www.earthdata.nasa.gov/                           |
| 8.    | Copernicus (GLO 30) DEM | 30 m       | 2023                   | https://spacedata.copernicus.eu/collection                |
| 9.    | Google Earth Imagery    | <1 m       | 2000–2022              | Google Earth Pro Tool                                     |
| 10.   | CRU gridded data        | 0.5°       | 1990–2002              | https://crudata.uea.ac.uk/cru/data/hrg                    |

also used for glacier mass balance estimation through the geodetic method. PlanetScope imagery (3 m resolution) was acquired from the Planet Labs website www.planet.com. Landsat data was downloaded *via* the USGS Earth Explorer site, https://earthexplorer.usgs.gov, and Sentinel-2A images were obtained from the "Copernicus internet hub of European Space Agency" (ESA). Table 1 gives a summary of the datasets utilized in this study. These datasets have been extensively used in previous studies to analyze changes occurring on the Earth's surface (Ahmad et al. 2022a; Imdad et al. 2023; Malik et al. 2024; Mushtaq et al. 2024; Saleem et al. 2024).

Image /page/7/Picture/2 description: A black and white circular icon showing a stylized boat on water. The boat is a simple silhouette with a small mast, floating on a wavy line, all enclosed within a circle.

# 4. Methods

## 4.1. Glacial lake mapping and change detection

We have employed Planet CubeSat RGB images to delineate the glacial lake outlines for the years 2016, 2018, 2020, and 2022. However, the Planet CubeSat data is available from the year 2016 onwards. Hence glacial lake outline delineation for 2000 and 2010 was carried out from Landsat 7 ETM+ images. Out of several techniques and approaches previously used for glacial lake mapping, we have employed an integrated approach using the normalized difference water index (NDWI) method coupled with manual digitization for the removal of any possible errors. NDWI is a widely employed method for the extraction of water pixels from a satellite image, using the difference in the reflectance values of Blue and Green bands (McFeeters 1996; Ahmed et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2022; Rather et al. 2024a). However, the NDWI method faces certain issues while classifying pixels containing muddy patches, shadows, cloud cover, or ice (Kaplan and Avdan 2017; Wang et al. 2020; Ahmad et al. 2022b, Mir et al. 2022; Rather et al. 2024b). These issues were tackled through the generation of relief, slope, aspect, and hill shade maps from the ALOS Pulsar DEM accompanied by manual correction using high-resolution Google Earth imagery. Cloud cover acts as a major impediment in the process of mapping different features from satellite imagery, therefore, images were selected from the post-monsoon months. Wherever a cloud-free image was not available, images from the adjacent months were taken to address this problem. The high resolution of the Planet CubeSat images (3 m) proved helpful in the minimization of any errors in the lake boundary delineation.

### 4.1.1. Estimation of glacial lake depth, volume and peak discharge

A glacier lake's depth, volume, and peak flow are crucial factors in determining the GLOF threat connected to that specific glacial lake. For calculating the glacial lake depth and volume from satellite datasets, we have to rely upon certain empirical equations which are based on the glacial lake area, developed by researchers across the world. Field surveys of glacial lakes require enormous effort and resources owing to the harsh terrain of the Himalayan cryosphere; therefore, empirical equations are widely employed for this purpose (Evans 1986; Wang et al. 2011; Emmer and Vilímek 2013; Fujita et al. 2013). Several equations for the calculation of glacial lake depth, volume, and potential peak discharge have been developed which include those by Huggel et al. (2002), Wang et al. (2011), Qi et al. (2022), Patel et al. (2017), Fujita et al. (2013), etc. A summary of these equations is given in Table 2. To reduce bias, we computed the lake volume using these empirical equations and took the average of all the equations into account for the final result. For lake volume estimation the following equations: (Equations (1) and (2)), given by Qi et al. (2022), showed results closest to the average values. These equations use the geometry of the lake beside the lake area to calculate the lake volume.

For lakes larger than 0.1 km<sup>2</sup>

$$V = 40.67^{1.184} - 3.218 \frac{mxw}{mxl} \tag{1}$$

Table 2. Empirical equations used for depth and volume calculations.

| Empirical Equation                           | Parameter Calculated | Reference            |
|----------------------------------------------|----------------------|----------------------|
| $D = 0.104 \times A0.42$                     | Lake Depth           | Huggel et al. (2002) |
| $D_{m} = 55 \times A0.25$                    | Lake Depth           | Fujita et al. (2013) |
| $Dm = 4 \times 10^{-5} \times A + 5.0564$    | Lake Depth           | Patel et al. (2017)  |
| $V = 0.104 \times A1.42$                     | Lake Volume          | Huggel et al. (2002) |
| $V = 0.035 \times A1.5$                      | Lake Volume          | Evans (1986)         |
| $V = 0.0578 \times A1.4683$                  | Lake Volume          | (Liu et al., 2020)   |
| $V = 40.67^{1.184} - 3.218 \text{ mxw/mxl}$  | Lake Volume          | Qi et al. (2022)     |
| $V = 557.4^{2.455} + 0.2005 \text{ mxw/mxl}$ | Lake Volume          | Qi et al. (2022)     |
| $V = A \times D_{m}$                         | Lake Volume          | Patel et al. (2017)  |
| $Q_{max} = 0.00077 \times V^{1.017}$         | Peak discharge       | Huggel et al. (2002) |
| $Q_{max} = 0.72 \times V0.53$                | Peak discharge       | Evans (1986)         |

For lakes smaller than 0.1 km<sup>2</sup>

$$V = 557.4^{2.455} + 0.2005 \frac{mxw}{mxl}$$
 (2)

## 4.2. Mapping the feeding glacier

We employed Planet CubeSat images along with Landsat 7 ETM+ and Sentinel 2 A imagery for mapping the feeding glacier of the lake. The Normalized difference Snow Index (NDSI) combined with visual interpretation was used for glacier area change detection analysis. NDSI method has been extensively used in the Himalayan cryosphere by several studies and is considered to be a reliable method for glacier mapping and change detection (Bolch et al. 2012; Kulkarni et al. 2012; (Paul et al. 2015)).

The error encountered in the estimation of glacier and lake areas is directly proportional to the resolution of the satellite images and it was evaluated using Equation (3).

$$A_{er} = 100 (n^{0.5} \times m) / A_{gl}$$
 (3)

Where n is the ratio of the glacial lake's perimeter to the spatial resolution, m is the unit pixel area of the image (m<sup>2</sup>), and  $A_{ol}$  is the glacial lake area (m<sup>2</sup>).

### 4.2.1. Mass balance estimation of the glacier

Estimating the mass balance of glaciers can reveal important information about how glaciers behave in response to climate change and how glaciers interact with glacial lakes over a certain period. Various studies have employed different techniques to estimate the mass balance of glaciers globally (Soruco et al. (2009), Zemp et al. (2009), Barrand et al. (2010), Pratap et al. (2016) and Kumar et al. (2019) such as the glaciological method ((Kulkarni, 1992)), geodetic method (Kumar et al. 2017; Majeed et al. 2021), Hydrological method (Bhutiyani 1999; Pratap et al. 2016), etc. However, in this study, we conducted the mass balance estimation of the Panikhar glacier using the geodetic method as this is a convenient method to estimate mass balance keeping in view the harsh terrain of the region ((Rashid et al. 2020)). The basis of the geodetic approach is the calculation of the glacier's surface elevation difference over

time. This method computes the surface elevation difference or thickness change of the glacier using digital elevation models from different time periods. The glacier area and ice density assumptions are then used to translate the elevation change into mass loss. (Braithwaite 2002; Muhammad et al. 2019; Romshoo et al. 2023). SRTM DEM and ASTER DEM (30 m resolution), acquired from https://www.earthdata.nasa.gov/ for the years 2000 and 2022 respectively, were used to calculate the elevation change of the glacier during this period using the DEM differencing technique. The DEMs were pre-processed in ArcMap 10.3 and the elevation difference was computed by comparing the elevation values of corresponding pixels from the two DEMs, using the raster calculator tool. The elevation difference was then translated into volume change using the cell size of the DEM. Assuming the ice density to be constant at 850 kg/m<sup>3</sup>, the mass loss from the glacier was calculated in kg/m<sup>3</sup> which was subsequently converted into meter water equivalent (m.w.e.).

### 4.2.2. Glacier surface velocity and ice thickness estimation

Surface velocities for the Panikhar Glacier were determined using the Glacier Image Velocimetry (GIV), a feature-tracking-based technique. GIV is a software package specifically designed for computing glacier velocity fields at high spatial resolution, utilizing unique points or characteristics on the glacier surface visible in consecutive satellite images. This meticulous process involves filtering individual velocity maps based on user-specified criteria, detecting and eliminating anomalous values using outlier detection functions, and computing statistical metrics for each grid cell over time. Sentinel-2 and Landsat true color composites were analyzed using GIV, with 20 multitemporal images with 30-meter spatial resolution from 2017 to 2023. Ice-thickness modeling during the same period utilized Copernicus DEM data at the same spatial resolution. Sentinel-2 images were used as input data for estimating glacier velocity, spanning from 2017 to 2023, with GIV configured to derive surface velocity considering a minimum temporal baseline gap of approximately 11 d and a maximum of three years. The displacement for each pair of images was computed using a multi-pass frequency domain cross-correlation algorithm, with subsequent filtering to remove pixels exceeding maximum velocity thresholds and enhancing result accuracy through spatial smoothing and rectification of systematic georeferencing errors using stable grounds.

The estimation of glacier thickness was conducted in MATLAB. For ice-thickness modeling, we employed the Copernicus DEM at the same spatial resolution. Our study adapted codes originally given by van Wyk de Vries et al. to suit our specific research requirements in our investigation of the Panikhar Glacier. We estimated ice thickness using an ice-velocity-based method. The equation follows the methodology proposed by (Gantayat et al., 2014), with further refinements by van Wyk de Vries et al., particularly focusing on the mean slope and surface velocity computations.

$$H = \frac{4\sqrt{1 \cdot 5U_s}}{Af^3 \ (\rho f sin\alpha)3} \tag{4}$$

In this equation, H depicts the ice thickness, Us denotes the surface velocity, f is the slope factor (often assumed as 0.8, especially suitable for Himalayan glaciers as noted by (Paterson, 1991)), g stands for the acceleration due to gravity (9.8 m/s<sup>-2</sup>),  $\alpha$  signifies the glacier slope, and  $\rho$  indicates the ice density (typically taken as 900 kg/m<sup>3</sup> according to (Farinotti et al., 2009)).

Glacier volume estimation adopted a piece-wise method, involving the summation of the product of the squared ground pixel size and its respective ice thickness. In Equation (5),  $H_{j,k}$  represents the mean value of each pixel in the ice-thickness map, while r depicts the ground resolution of the pixel, assuming square pixels applicable to optical remote sensing data.

$$Vp = \sum_{i=1}^{n_j} \sum_{k=1}^{n_k} H_{j,k} \times r^2$$
 (5)

## 4.3. GLOF hazard analysis

In the Himalayan region, a widely used method for determining GLOF vulnerability is predictive analysis utilizing a multicriteria framework (Bolch et al. 2008; Wang et al. 2011; Worni et al. 2013; Rounce et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2018; Dubey and Goyal 2020; Khadka et al. 2021; Ahmed et al. 2022). Despite the extensive use of this method in GLOF investigations, this method involves some amount of subjective expert judgment. This is because the GLOF susceptibility analysis is a complex process, and local variations in the influencing criteria make it nearly difficult to develop a uniform framework for this purpose globally (Allen et al. 2019; Taylor et al. 2023). In this study, we adopted the framework given by Che et al. (2014) as found to be suitable in our study area. This framework includes 10 relevant criteria pertaining to the glacial lake and its surrounding conditions that affect GLOF susceptibility and classifies the lakes into 5 levels of hazard from level 1 to level 5 using the weighted sum method (Table 3).

## 4.4. GLOF modeling

The two-dimensional (2D) GLOF modeling of the lake was done using HEC-RAS 2D (Version 6.3.1) to simulate two distinct scenarios: piping and overtopping. The aim was to assess the potential flood impacts from the glacial lake on the nearby downstream settlements. This approach has been extensively used to model the GLOF events globally as well as in the Himalayan region (Klimeš et al. 2014; Worni et al.

Table 3. Integrated criteria used for assessing GLOF hazard, adopted from Che et al. (2014).

| Index                                        | Criteria                     | Weight | Criteria Presence |
|----------------------------------------------|------------------------------|--------|-------------------|
| Type of glacial lake                         | Terminal moraine dammed lake | 0.15   | Yes               |
| Area of lake                                 | >0.2 km2                     | 0.15   | Yes               |
| Distance between lake and its mother glacier | <500 m                       | 0.15   | Yes               |
| Average slope of the glacier                 | >7°                          | 0.10   | Yes               |
| Slope of the downstream                      | >20°                         | 0.10   | No                |
| Top width of the dam                         | <60 m                        | 0.10   | No                |
| Area of the glacier                          | >2 km2                       | 0.09   | Yes               |
| Slope between lake and its mother glacier    | >8°                          | 0.07   | No                |
| Change of lake area                          | >10% in a decade             | 0.06   | Yes               |
| Elevation of the lake                        | >5000 m                      | 0.03   | No                |

Image /page/11/Picture/2 description: A close-up, black and white line drawing of a circle. Inside the circle, there is a horizontal line with a small, dark rectangle resting on top of it. Below the horizontal line is a dark, filled, semi-circular shape. There are faint markings that appear to be letters 'd' and 'f' above the rectangle.

2014; Sattar et al. 2019; Sattar et al. 2021; Majeed et al. 2021; Ahmed et al. 2022; Rawat et al. 2023b).

### 4.4.1. Model input and setup

HEC-RAS requires a digital elevation model (DEM), for providing detailed terrain data for the study area. This raster-based DEM serves as the foundation for defining the flow area of interest, spanning from the glacial lake to the vulnerable settlements downstream. Within this defined flow area, a 2D computational mesh is constructed using cells of uniform dimensions. Each cell in the mesh is characterized by: Manning's roughness coefficient (N value), representing the flow resistance and the elevation data extracted from the DEM, specifying the terrain height at each cell location. ALOS PALSAR DEM was employed in this study given its better spatial resolution of 12.5 meters.

### 4.4.2. Simulating two different GLOF failures

- Piping Failure: This scenario simulates the failure of the lake dam or natural barrier due to internal erosion (piping). The modeling process involves steps like defining an initial breach hydrograph corresponding to the piping failure, setting the boundary conditions to initiate breach formation, and simulating flood propagation downstream. The 2D hydrodynamic modeling approach captures the breach evolution and flood wave propagation characteristics along the flow path. The characteristics of the potential flood wave were simulated for two different case scenarios presuming 50% and 100% drainage of the lake respectively.
- b. Overtopping Failure: In overtopping failure, flood generation occurs when water levels exceed the capacity of the dam or barrier, causing water to spill over the top. The modeling procedure includes defining an appropriate initial breach hydrograph corresponding to the overtopping event and configuring the boundary conditions to simulate breach initiation and the subsequent flood wave propagation downstream. This is followed by employing the 2D hydraulic model to capture the breach dynamics and the flood wave behavior, considering terrain elevations and flow resistances. This was also done keeping in view the moderate and worst-case scenarios with 50% and 100% volume of the lake.

### 4.4.3. Model outputs and analysis

The 2D modeling process generates spatially distributed outputs including water depth distribution, flow velocity profiles indicating flood wave dynamics, and inundation extents depicting areas affected by the flood waters. These outputs enable detailed analysis of flood impacts along the route from the Lake to the settlements for both piping and overtopping scenarios. By integrating terrain data, hydraulic properties, and the breach conditions, the modeling study provides critical insights into potential flood hazards and helps in the development of mitigation frameworks for disaster preparedness and response. This comprehensive approach leverages advanced hydraulic modeling techniques to simulate complex flood scenarios, facilitating informed decision-making and risk assessment in vulnerable regions prone to GLOF events.

# 5. Results

## 5.1. Depth, volume, and peak discharge of the lake

The glacial lake depth and volume estimations were carried out using the various regression equations stated in Table 4. The results of these equations vary considerably and hence an average value of all of these equations was considered as the final estimate of lake depth and lake volume to minimize the bias in the final estimates as suggested by Emmer (2018). Using this approach, the average depth of the lake was estimated as  $31.50\,\mathrm{m}$  while the average volume was estimated as  $14.04\times10^6\,\mathrm{m}^3$ . The equation developed by Fujita showed exaggerated estimates of lake depth in comparison to the other equations and in calculating the lake volume, the maximum value was obtained through Liu's equation while Qi's equation showed results closest to the average value of all equations.

The estimation of the Peak discharge of the lake was done using the equations given by Huggel et al. (2002) and Evans (1986), and the values obtained from these equations are recorded in Table 4. To minimize the bias, the average value of these two equations, which came out to be 7954.19 m<sup>3</sup>s<sup>-</sup>1, was taken as the final estimate of the peak discharge of the lake as suggested by Emmer et al. (2018).

## 5.2. Glacial lake area change

The change detection analysis of the lake, using multi-temporal datasets, revealed an overall increase of 78.72% in the lake's area at a rate of  $0.017\,\mathrm{km^2}$  per annum. The lake area has gone up from  $0.10\,\mathrm{km^2}\,\pm\,75.9~\mathrm{m^2}$  in 2000 to  $0.22\,\mathrm{km^2}\,\pm\,0.82~\mathrm{m^2}$  in 2010,  $0.33\,\mathrm{km^2}\,\pm\,0.82~\mathrm{m^2}$  in 2016,  $0.37\,\mathrm{km^2}\,\pm\,0.72\,\mathrm{m^2}$  in 2018,  $0.41\,\mathrm{km^2}\,\pm\,0.67\,\mathrm{m^2}$  in 2020 and  $0.47\,\mathrm{km^2}\,\pm\,0.62~\mathrm{m^2}$  in 2022. The lake area has witnessed an overall increase of  $\sim\!0.37\,\mathrm{km^2}$  in the past 22 years. It has almost doubled in each decade from 2000 to 2020 which depicts a very rapid expansion scenario, much likely to accelerate further in the future decade of 2020–2030 keeping in view the increasing temperature trends in the region. Figure 3 depicts the expansion of the lake through lake outline maps.

## 5.3. Changes in the feeding glacier of the lake

### 5.3.1. Area changes

The feeding glacier of Panikhar Lake was also subjected to spatio-temporal change detection analysis. The results revealed a significant decrease of  $\sim 0.61 \, \mathrm{km}^2$  in the glacier area accounting for a 13.2% overall decrease in the glacier area for the past

|  | Table 4. A summary of | f various equations used | d for depth and vo | lume measurements. |
|--|-----------------------|--------------------------|--------------------|--------------------|
|--|-----------------------|--------------------------|--------------------|--------------------|

| Emp. Equation | Depth (m) | Volume (106 m3) | Peak Discharge (m3/s) |
|---------------|-----------|-----------------|-----------------------|
| Huggel        | 25.08     | 11.78           | 11,963.14             |
| Fujita        | 45.58     | –               | –                     |
| Evans         | –         | 11.33           | 3945.24               |
| Liu           | –         | 19.17           | –                     |
| Qi            | –         | 14.43           | –                     |
| Patel         | 23.86     | 11.21           | –                     |
| Average Value | 31.50     | 14.04           | 7954.19               |

Image /page/13/Figure/3 description: A figure displaying six satellite images in a 2x3 grid, illustrating the expansion of a lake from the year 2000 to 2022. The images are for the years 2000, 2010, and 2016 in the top row, and 2018, 2020, and 2022 in the bottom row. Each image shows the lake outlined and colored in dark blue against a terrestrial background. Each panel includes a scale bar from 0 to 0.4 kilometers, a north arrow, and coordinate axes for latitude (from 4°2'0"N to 34°2'20"N) and longitude (from 75°50'20"E to 75°51'0"E). The lake appears as two small, separate bodies of water in 2000, which merge and grow significantly in size through 2010, 2016, 2018, 2020, and 2022. The images for 2016, 2018, and 2022 show small white patches on the lake's surface. The caption below the images reads: 'Figure 3. Expansion of Pari lake from 2000 to 2022 depicted on Planet Cube Sat (RGB)'.

Figure 3. Expansion of Panikhar glacial lake from 2000 to 2022 depicted on Planet CubeSat (RGB) and Landsat 7 ETM+ images.

Image /page/13/Figure/5 description: A line graph showing the relationship between Lake Area and Glacier Area from the year 2000 to 2022. The x-axis represents the Year, from 1998 to 2024. There are two y-axes: the left y-axis represents Lake Area in square kilometers (km²), ranging from 0 to 0.5, and the right y-axis represents Glacier Area in square kilometers (km²), ranging from 3.8 to 4.8. The graph contains four lines: a solid green line for Lake Area, a solid red line for Glacier Area, a dashed green line for the linear trend of Lake Area, and a dashed red line for the linear trend of Glacier Area. The Lake Area shows a steady increase from 0.1 km² in 2000 to 0.47 km² in 2022. Specific data points for Lake Area are (2000, 0.1), (2010, 0.22), (2016, 0.33), (2018, 0.37), (2020, 0.41), and (2022, 0.47). The Glacier Area shows a general decrease from 4.63 km² in 2000 to 4.02 km² in 2022, with a sharp drop between 2018 and 2020. Specific data points for Glacier Area are (2000, 4.63), (2010, 4.58), (2016, 4.4), (2018, 4.39), (2020, 4.04), and (2022, 4.02). The trend lines confirm the inverse relationship: as the glacier area decreases, the lake area increases.

Figure 4. Glacier and glacial lake area trends.

22 years. The overall area of the glacier has decreased from  $4.63\,\mathrm{km}^2\pm139~\mathrm{m}^2$  in 2000 to  $4.58\,\mathrm{km}^2\pm138.4~\mathrm{m}^2$  in 2010,  $4.50\,\mathrm{km}^2\pm0.01\,\mathrm{m}^2$  in 2016,  $4.39\,\mathrm{km}^2\pm0.01\,\mathrm{m}^2$  in 2018,  $4.04\,\mathrm{km}^2\pm0.02\,\mathrm{m}^2$  in 2020 and  $4.02\,\mathrm{km}^2\pm0.02\,\mathrm{m}^2$  in 2022 with an annual decrease rate of  $\sim\!0.03\,\mathrm{km}^2$  (Figures 4 and 5). The glacier has witnessed a snout retreat of 348 m in this period. The glacier and the glacial lake areas behold a reciprocal relationship with each other which means that the glacial lake is expanding at the expense of its feeding glacier (Figure 4).

### 5.3.2. Mass balance of the glacier

The glacier mass balance was estimated through the geodetic method and the results reveal that the glacier has, on average, undergone a thickness loss of 7.04 m from 2000

Image /page/14/Figure/1 description: A map titled "Figure 5. Spatio-temporal evolution of the Penikhar glacier for the last 22 years." The main image is a satellite view of a glacier, shown in light blue, surrounded by mountainous terrain. The map includes latitude and longitude coordinates, a scale bar from 0 to 1.7 Kms, and a north arrow. Overlaid on the glacier are several colored outlines indicating its extent in different years. A legend titled "Glacier Outlines" shows the following: a light purple line for 2022, a light green line for 2020, a blue line for 2018, a black line for 2016, a tan line for 2010, and a red line for 2000. The satellite data is from Sentinel 2A (2022), using Band 11 (red), Band 8 (green), and Band 3 (blue). In the bottom right corner, there is an inset map titled "Glacier Snout," which is a close-up of the glacier's terminus. This inset has its own scale bar from 0 to 0.4 Kms and a legend showing the glacier snout outlines for 2016 (dark green), 2010 (light blue), 2000 (black), 2022 (red), 2020 (pink), and 2018 (light green). The outlines on both maps generally show the glacier receding over time.

Figure 5. Spatio-temporal evolution of the Panikhar glacier for the last 22 years.

to 2022 at the rate of  $0.32\,\mathrm{m~a}^{-1}$ . The total mass balance of the glacier was estimated to be  $-5.922\,\mathrm{m}$  w.e. which amounts to a total mass loss of  $\sim 5.92$  metric tons per square metre during this period at the rate of 0.27 metric tons per square metre per year (Figure 6). The mass balance values across the glacier fall from  $-0.05\,\mathrm{m}$  w.e. to  $0.06\,\mathrm{m}$  w.e. with a mean negative value. This depicts that despite certain accumulation regions on the glacier, the glacier has an overall negative mean mass balance. These results are in proximity to other studies in the region. For instance, Kumar et al. (2017) reported an annual mass balance of  $-0.53\pm0.16\,\mathrm{m}$  we. per year for the glaciers in the Western Himalayas. Majeed et al. (2021) reported a mass balance of  $-0.24\,\mathrm{m}$  w.e. per year for clean glaciers and  $-0.37\,\mathrm{m}$  w.e. per year for debris-covered ones in the Pangong region.

### 5.3.3. Surface velocity, ice thickness, and volume of the glacier

According to the velocity estimations, the glacier's mean velocity was estimated to be  $3.38 \,\mathrm{m}$  a-1, while its surface velocity varied from  $0.87 \,\mathrm{m/y}$  to  $9.76 \,\mathrm{m}$  a<sup>-1</sup>. (Figure 7a). The glacier is characterized by a slowly moving snout with slightly increasing velocities in the upper accumulation zone. Previous studies in the region also report the existence of an increasing trend in the surface velocity of the glaciers with increasing elevation until a maximum is reached towards the transient snow lines (Bhushan et al. 2018; Ahmed et al. 2022).

The ice thickness measurement of the glacier, conducted in MATLAB, reveals that the thickness of the glacier varies from 14.39 m to 50.87 m (Figure 7b) while the mean thickness was estimated to be 30.95 m. The thickness of the glacier increases

Image /page/15/Figure/3 description: A map illustrating the spatial variation of mass balance on a glacier. The map is oriented with a north arrow pointing up. The glacier is outlined with a blue 'Glacier Boundary' line and is overlaid with a color gradient representing the 'Mass Balance (m.w.e)'. The color scale in the legend ranges from red (0.06) to yellow (-0.01) to green (-0.05), indicating areas of mass gain and loss. The western, higher-elevation part of the glacier shows a small red area of positive mass balance, while the majority of the glacier is yellow and green, indicating negative mass balance. Brown 'Contour (100m)' lines show the topography, with elevations ranging from 4100 meters at the eastern tip to over 5100 meters in the west. The map includes a scale bar from 0 to 2 kilometers. The area is located between approximately 75°47'0"E and 75°50'0"E longitude and 34°1'0"N and 34°3'0"N latitude.

Figure 6. Spatial variation of geodetic mass balance across Panikhar glacier in meter water equivalent (m.w.e).

Image /page/15/Figure/5 description: The image displays two maps, labeled A and B, showing characteristics of a glacier. Both maps are georeferenced with latitude and longitude coordinates and include a 1 km scale bar and a north arrow. Map A, titled "Glacier Velocity (m/y)", uses a color scale from blue (Low: 0.87 m/y) to red (High: 9.76 m/y) to show glacier surface velocity. The highest velocities are concentrated in the central, wider part of the glacier, indicated by yellow and red patches. Map B, titled "Glacier Thickness (m)", uses a color scale from blue (Low: 14.39 m) to magenta (High: 50.87 m). This map shows the glacier is thickest in the central area, depicted in magenta, and thins out towards the edges, shown in blue.

Figure 7. Figure depicting (A) glacier surface velocity and (B) Ice thickness distribution.

Image /page/16/Figure/1 description: A line graph displays Mean Temperature and Total annual precipitation from 1990 to 2020. The x-axis represents the Year, from 1990 to 2020. The left y-axis represents Temperature in degrees Celsius, ranging from -1 to 8. The right y-axis represents Precipitation in millimeters (mm), ranging from 50 to 400. There are two data series plotted. The first, in red with square markers, shows the Mean Temperature (T\_mean). It exhibits a clear upward trend over the period, starting near 0 degrees Celsius in 1990 and rising to about 1 degree Celsius by 2020. A red dashed trendline with a shaded confidence interval is shown, with an R-squared value of R²=0.275. The second data series, in green with square markers, shows the Total annual precipitation. This series shows significant year-to-year fluctuation, with values ranging from approximately 150 mm to over 300 mm. A green dashed trendline with a shaded confidence interval is nearly horizontal, indicating no significant trend, which is supported by a very low R-squared value of R²=0.0138.

Figure 8. Temperature and precipitation trends in Ladakh.

towards the center and decreases as we move towards the edges. The total glacier volume as estimated from the thickness estimates and the glacier pixel areas was found to be 45,783 m<sup>3</sup>.

## 5.4. Temperature and precipitation variability over the region

The Ladakh region is overall a data-scarce region with only a few observatories for the generation of observed temperature and precipitation data. Keeping this in mind, we projected the trends in the mean annual temperature (T mean) and Total annual precipitation in the region using a gridded climatic dataset given by the Climate Research Unit (CRU) to peek into the climatic controls of the glacial lake expansion. It was found that the mean annual temperature has witnessed a slight positive trend ( $R^2 = 0.275$ ) during this period while the total annual precipitation in the region has witnessed a slight negative trend with an  $R^2$  value of 0.0138 (Figure 8).

The warming temperature trends in this region and declining precipitation trends are also confirmed by previous studies that use various gridded climate data products to analyze the climatic variability in Ladakh (Shafiq et al. 2016; Ahmad et al. 2019; Mann et al. 2022). This may lead to further glacier recession and subsequent glacial lake expansion in the near future making the local populations vulnerable to cryospheric disasters such as the GLOF.

# 6. GLOF risk

## 6.1. GLOF susceptibility analysis

We carried out the GLOF susceptibility analysis of the glacial lake based on the approach used by Che et al. (2014) which includes criteria pertaining to both the lake and the surrounding conditions that affect GLOF susceptibility (Table 3) and classifies the lakes into 5 levels of hazard from level 1 to level 5. The lake was found to be a High-hazard lake associated with a level 4 hazard. Some of the major reasons that account for the high hazard index of the lake are its large size, unstable moraine dam, direct connection to its mother glacier, marked rate of expansion, and a large-

Image /page/17/Figure/3 description: A geographical map illustrating potential zones of mass movement in a mountainous region. The map is set against a satellite image background and includes longitude and latitude markings, a scale bar, and a compass rose. An inset map in the top-left corner provides a closer satellite view of the 'Glacier Snout' and 'Panikhar Lake', with a steep slope outlined in red. Red lines connect this outlined area to the main map, which highlights the 'Potential Zones of Mass Movement'. These zones are color-coded based on slope steepness. A legend in the bottom-right corner defines the symbols and colors used. 'Glacial Lake' is shown in solid light blue, and 'Glacier' is a white area with blue hatching. The 'Slope (degrees)' is categorized by color: green for 0-8, light green for 8-19, yellow for 19-31, orange for 31-45, and red for >45. The map shows that the areas with the highest potential for mass movement (red and orange) are on the steep slopes adjacent to the glacial lake and glacier.

**Figure 9.** The local topographic setting of the Panikhar glacier-lake complex and zones of possible mass movement.

sized mother glacier (4.02 km<sup>2</sup>) with a slope of 16.5°. Moreover, the lake is prone to rock fall/debris fall from its adjoining steep slopes as evident from the slope profile of the lake surroundings (Figure 9).

## 6.2. Hydrodynamic modelling

We analyzed the potential impacts of an outburst event originating from the Panikhar Lake by analyzing the temporal and spatial properties of the flood wave using two-dimensional hydraulic modeling for two different case scenarios. In scenario 1, we assumed that 50% of the total volume of the lake is drained whereas scenario 2 was the worst-case scenario assuming a 100% drainage of the lake.

### 6.2.1. Scenario 1: assuming 50% water volume of the lake is released

Given the dynamic nature of high-magnitude flood events, we focused on understanding the changing hydraulic properties over time, particularly examining discharge, flow velocity, and depths across the flow channel. Assuming drainage of 50% of the lake's total water volume, we found that the maximum discharge at the point of the breach was 1908.25 m³/s and 3271.50 m³/s for the piping and overtopping failures respectively (Figure 10a). The routed hydrographs depict that the flood wave in this scenario will reach the first settlement in 1 h and 4 min after the dam breach in both the piping and the overtopping failures with a peak discharge of 2701.1 m³/s and 2714.7 m³/s respectively (Figure 11a). The flood depths along the flow path are

Image /page/18/Figure/1 description: A close-up, black and white image showing the number 18 followed by a plus sign enclosed in a circle.

Image /page/18/Figure/2 description: The image contains two line graphs, labeled A and B, which are breach hydrographs comparing 'Piping Failure' and 'Overtopping failure' scenarios. Both graphs plot Discharge (m³/s) on the y-axis against Time (hh:mm:ss) on the x-axis.

Graph A has a y-axis ranging from 0 to 3500 m³/s. The blue line represents 'Piping Failure' and shows a peak discharge of 1908.25 m³/s. The orange line represents 'Overtopping failure' and shows a higher peak discharge of 3271.50 m³/s. The x-axis ranges from 1:00:00 to 4:22:55.

Graph B has a y-axis ranging from 0 to 5000 m³/s. The green line represents 'Piping Failure' with a peak discharge of 3890.99 m³/s. The red line represents 'Overtopping Failure' with a higher peak discharge of 5111.39 m³/s. The x-axis ranges from 1:00:00 to 3:25:42.

The caption below the graphs reads: 'Figure 10. Breach hydrographs depicting peak discharge at the breach in piping and overtopping'.

Figure 10. Breach hydrographs depicting peak discharge at the breach in piping and overtopping failures (A) 50% volume of the lake (B) 100% volume of the lake (worst case scenario).

depicted in Figure 12. The maximum flood velocity was estimated to be 18.26 m/s while the maximum depth of the flood wave was found to be 14.87 m.

The maximum area under the threat of inundation along the valley was calculated as 4.74 km<sup>2</sup> for both the overtopping and pipping failure situations. The mean flood depth across the flow channel was estimated to be 3.41 meters and the mean flood velocity was found to be 3.84 m/s. We found that the potential flood wave in this scenario inundates bridges, roads, and a few residential houses along the channel in settlement 2 and near the Suru Valley bridge (Figure 13).

### 6.2.2. Scenario 2: assuming 100% water volume of the lake is released

The maximum discharge, in the worst-case scenario with 100% water release, at the point of breach was calculated to be 3890.99 m<sup>3</sup>/s and 5111.39 m<sup>3</sup>/s for the piping and overtopping scenarios respectively (Figure 10b). A routed flood wave in the simulation reached the closest settlement (settlement 1) of the Panikhar village in 50 min after the lake-breach event with a peak discharge of 6345.06 m<sup>3</sup>/s and 6453.9 m<sup>3</sup>/s for the piping and overtopping scenarios respectively (Figure 11b).

Image /page/19/Figure/3 description: The image displays four line graphs arranged in a 2x2 grid, labeled A and B on the right side for each row. The graphs show discharge over time for different locations under two failure scenarios: "Piping Failure" (left column) and "Overtopping Failure" (right column).

Row A contains two graphs with the y-axis representing Discharge (m³/s) from 0 to 3000. The x-axis represents Time in hh:mm:ss format.
- The top-left graph, "Piping Failure," shows five hydrographs for different locations: Settlement 1, Surrur Valley Bridge, Settlement 2, Bridge 2, and Picnic Spot Damasna. The peak discharge for Settlement 1 is approximately 2600 m³/s at around 2:10:36. The other locations have lower peaks that occur later in time.
- The top-right graph, "Overtopping Failure," shows similar hydrographs. The peak discharge for Settlement 1 is also around 2600 m³/s but occurs earlier, at approximately 2:00:04.

Row B contains two graphs with the y-axis representing Discharge (m³/s) from 0 to 8000. The x-axis represents Time in hh:mm format.
- The bottom-left graph, "Piping Failure," shows five hydrographs for: Settlement 1, Suru Valley Bridge, Settlement 2, Bridge 2, and Picnic Spot Damasna. The peak discharge for Settlement 1 and Suru Valley Bridge is approximately 6400 m³/s at around 02:00. The other locations have lower peaks that occur later.
- The bottom-right graph, "Overtopping Failure," shows similar hydrographs. The peak discharge for Settlement 1 and Suru Valley Bridge is also around 6400 m³/s but occurs slightly earlier, at approximately 01:55.

**Figure 11.** Routed hydrographs at various locations along the downstream flow channel in piping and overtopping failures (A) Assuming release of 50% of the water volume of the lake (B) Assuming release of 100% of the water volumeof the lake.

The two-dimensional routing of the breach hydrograph is simulated over a distance of 25.6 km along the flow channel, from the lake to the Damasna picnic spot in Panikhar village. The maximum area under the threat of inundation along the valley was calculated as 5.38 km² for both the overtopping and piping failures (Figure 16). Across the entire channel, the mean flow discharge and mean flow depth are recorded at 588 m³/s and 5.31 m for pipping failure 755 m³/s, and 5.33 m for overtopping failure with a mean flow velocity of 5.37 m/s. The flood depth and velocity vary along the flow channel as per the terrain profile of the flow channel (Figure 13). The flood depth and velocity values decline towards the lower reaches of the flow channel, as a result of the increase in the channel width and decrease in the slope.

The potential flood wave inundates infrastructure such as roads, bridges, and settlements along the channel with varying depths and velocities for both the piping and overtopping failures (Figures 14 and 15, Table 5). We evaluated the flood depths and flood velocities along the flow channel at settlements 1 and 2 to determine the maximum flood depths, peak flood velocities, and the time of the peak. Settlements 1 and 2 witness the highest potential flood depths of 7.9 and 7.65 m in the overtopping scenario whereas the lowest flood depths are witnessed at the Damasna picnic spot. Settlement 1 witnesses the highest peak velocities of 12.36 m/s and 11.35 m/s in the Piping and the overtopping scenarios (Figure 15).

# 7. Discussion

The Himalayan region is a hotspot of GLOF risk (Taylor et al. 2023) and this risk is projected to increase three times by the year 2100 (Zhang et al. 2024). 18% of all the

Image /page/20/Figure/1 description: A close-up, black and white image showing the number 20 next to a circular icon. The icon contains a simple line drawing of an oil lamp with a flame, and a short line extends downwards from the bottom of the circle.

Image /page/20/Figure/2 description: This image, labeled Figure 12, displays two sets of maps illustrating flood depth and velocity profiles in a downstream flow channel. The top set of three maps, labeled (A), (B), and (C), shows the 'Flood Depth (m)'. A color scale indicates that the depth ranges from a low of 0.001 m (blue/green) to a high of 14.87 m (red). The maps depict a river channel winding through a mountainous terrain, with varying depths indicated by the color coding. The bottom set of three maps, also labeled (A), (B), and (C) for the same geographical areas, shows the 'Flood Velocity (m)'. The corresponding color scale ranges from a low of 0.001 m (green) to a high of 18.26 m (red). Each map includes latitude and longitude coordinates and a 2 km scale bar.

Figure 12. Flood depth and velocity profiles in the downstream flow channel in the first case scenario (50% volume). Parts A, B and C represent the 1st, 2nd and 3rd sections along the flow channel.

Image /page/21/Figure/3 description: A composite image showing several annotated satellite views of a river valley. The river and its floodplain are highlighted in a translucent green. The main panel on the left shows a wide view of the river with a white arrow indicating the "Flow Direction." Several points are marked with red pins and labels along the river: "Picnic Spot Damasna," "Bridge 2," "Settlement 2," "Settlement 1," and "Suru Valley Bridge." Red boxes highlight the areas of Bridge 2 and Settlement 2. The middle panel is a closer view of the "Suru Valley Bridge" area, with white arrows pointing to structures labeled "Houses," one of which is circled. The right side of the image contains two smaller, zoomed-in panels. The top right panel shows a close-up of "Settlement 2," with a red box around it and an arrow pointing to "Houses." The bottom right panel is a close-up view of "Bridge 2" spanning the river.

Figure 13. Buildings, roads, bridges and other infrastructure under potential threat of GLOF inundation in scenario (1) in the downstream flow channel of Panikhar lake.

previous GLOF events have occurred in the High Mountain Asia (HMA) which includes the Himalayan region. Most of the GLOF events in Himalayan region have been reported from the moraine and ice-dammed glacial lakes (Shrestha et al. 2010). The key triggers of GLOF in the region are extreme precipitation events and mass movements such as ice avalanches (Shrestha et al. 2010; Zhang et al. 2024). The rapid expansion of mountainous populations into high-risk zones is one of the major contributors to increasing GLOF risk in this region (Taylor et al. 2023). A large body of literature has been produced by researchers to generate baseline data about the GLOF phenomenon in the data-scarce Himalayan region (Emmer et al. 2022). These studies have focused on the preparation of glacial lake inventories, identification of potentially dangerous glacial lakes, and estimation of GLOF risk associated with hazardous lakes.

Categorizing a lake as potentially dangerous is very difficult given the multitude of factors influencing a GLOF event such as lake size, lake dam, lake surroundings, landslide, avalanche susceptibility, or extreme weather event. Therefore, under particular circumstances, an otherwise stable lake can also produce a GLOF event. Extreme precipitation events have caused notable GLOF events in the past through dam overtopping or collapse. This adds to the complexity of understanding and predicting the GLOF disaster. The same problem arises with the categorization of glacial lakes as potentially dangerous or otherwise based on size. Generally, some area threshold (e.g.  $A > 0.1 \text{ km}^2$ ) is defined to exclude smaller lakes from the list of potentially dangerous lakes. For instance, Worni et al. (2013) did not classify the Gya Lake in Ladakh as potentially hazardous, maybe because it was ice-covered or because its size was below the mapping threshold of the study (0.01 km<sup>2</sup>), leading to the assumption that it did not pose any significant threat to the settlements downstream. It can be challenging to leave out lakes that may be dangerous, as the same was demonstrated by the 2013 Chorabari lake outburst event (Das et al. 2015; Bhambri et al.

Image /page/22/Figure/1 description: This image is Figure 14, which displays flood depth and velocity profiles for a downstream flow channel. The figure is divided into two main horizontal sections. The top section shows flood depth, and the bottom section shows flood velocity. Each section contains three maps labeled (A), (B), and (C), which depict different segments of a river flowing through a mountainous terrain. For the top section, a color scale represents 'Flood Depth (m)', ranging from a low of 0.001 (blue) to a high of 17.60 (red). For the bottom section, a color scale represents 'Flood Velocity (m/s)', ranging from a low of 0.001 (green) to a high of 23.78 (red). The maps include geographical coordinates, scale bars in kilometers, and a north arrow on the 'C' panels.

Figure 14. Flood depth and velocity profiles in the downstream flow channel in the worst case scenario (100% volume). Parts A, B and C represent 1st, 2nd and 3rd sections along the flow channel.

2016). According to several studies, small glacial lakes have the potential to seriously harm local livelihoods and cause major problems, as demonstrated by the Domkhar food in Ladakh (Ikeda et al. 2016) and other minor foods in Hunza region (Ashraf et al. 2021). The triggering factors of the GLOF are often dynamic and may change from time to time both quantitatively and qualitatively and hence require regular monitoring. e.g. Lakes that are stable as such, may get exposed to unstable

Image /page/23/Figure/3 description: A figure with two side-by-side panels, each showing a map with a flood depth overlay and an inset graph of water velocity over time. The left panel is located at 75°57'0"E and shows a map with a settlement labeled "Settlement 1". The flood depth is represented by a color scale from blue (Low: 0.001 m) to red (High: 17.60 m). The inset graph shows velocity in m/s on the y-axis and time in hh:mm on the x-axis, from 01:26 to 03:50. The velocity peaks at over 10 m/s around 02:00. The right panel is located at 75°58'0"E and 34°8'0"N and shows a map with a settlement labeled "Settlement 2". It uses the same depth color scale. The inset graph shows velocity peaking at over 5 m/s around 02:00 over the same time period. Both maps include a north arrow.

Figure 15. Flood depth and flood velocity curves at settlements 1 and 2 in Panikhar village.

Table 5. Flood parameters at various locations of the flow path downstream of Panikhar lake for the worst case scenario i.e.100% water release.

| Location               | Distance from the Lake (km) | Overtopping Failure |                  |                        | Pipping Failure   |                  |                        |
|------------------------|-----------------------------|---------------------|------------------|------------------------|-------------------|------------------|------------------------|
|                        |                             | Mean<br>Depth (m)   | Max<br>Depth (m) | Peak Velocity<br>(m/s) | Mean<br>Depth (m) | Max<br>Depth (m) | Peak Velocity<br>(m/s) |
| Settlement 1           | 15.6                        | 4.35                | 7.97             | 11.35                  | 3.05              | 6.61             | 12.36                  |
| Suru valley<br>Bridge  | 16.11                       | 2.25                | 4.16             | 9.05                   | 1.96              | 4.29             | 8.66                   |
| Settlement 2           | 18.01                       | 4.63                | 7.65             | 5.27                   | 4.71              | 7.67             | 3.70                   |
| Bridge 2               | 19.08                       | 2.73                | 5.33             | 5.82                   | 1.97              | 3.99             | 5.36                   |
| Picnic Spot<br>Damasna | 22.50                       | 1.70                | 6.96             | 6.615                  | 5.13              | 6.70             | 7.187                  |

Image /page/23/Picture/7 description: A composite figure displaying satellite maps of a river valley to highlight specific locations and features. The main panel on the left shows a winding river in a mountainous region, with a green shaded area along its banks. The river's flow direction is indicated by a white arrow pointing upwards. Several locations are marked with red pins and labeled, including "Settlement 1", "Suru Valley Bridge", "Settlement 2", "Bridge 2", and "Picnic Spot Damasna". On the right, there are three zoomed-in panels. The top panel shows a close-up of "Settlement 2", with red arrows pointing to "Houses". The middle panel is a close-up of "Bridge 2", with red arrows indicating "Bridge 2 and buildings". The bottom panel provides another view of the area, with a red oval highlighting "Roads and houses in Settlement 2".

Figure 16. Inundation area in scenario 2 (100% water release) with some important areas with buildings, roads, bridges and other infrastructure under potential threat of GLOF inundation.

surrounding slopes or ice avalanche zones after expanding into the glacial valleys thus enhancing their susceptibility (Haeberli et al., 2017).

As moraine and ice-dammed lakes are more vulnerable to GLOF, they should receive greater attention when it comes to GLOF prioritization. Also, lakes that are in close proximity to the parent glacier are more likely to produce a GLOF as these lakes are more at threat of Icefalls and glacial calving activity. The likelihood of piping activity leading to a dam collapse is higher in lakes with underground drainage (Narama et al. 2018). Additionally, because thermokarst processes may block the intra-moraine channels, which can result in overflow and subsequent lake outburst through breaching, glacial lakes with subterranean drainage are more prone to GLOFs unlike the ones with stable surface drainage (Narama et al. 2018; Petrakov et al. 2020). Lakes with smaller dam width-to-height ratios and lower freeboard levels should be the focus of the GLOF study as they are important indicators of the dam's stability and can be estimated using high-resolution satellite imagery.

Studies similar to the present study had been previously conducted for the South-Lhonak Lake in Sikkim, which, later on, witnessed a severe GLOF event this year killing at least 40 people. However, effective measures were not taken to prevent this disaster which could have been easily done through certain practical measures taken on time. To avoid such tragedies in the future, a closer examination of the GLOF hazard is necessary, aided by more precise tools and dependable datasets. However, scientific knowledge of the environmental processes at play in the Himalayan region is often hampered by the sparse network of monitoring sites required to generate an ample amount of reliable meteorological and glaciological data. Regularly updated weather data coupled with high-resolution imagery, DEMs and detailed inventories can help in understanding the processes of the Himalayan cryosphere much more closely to prevent any future disasters. In addition to fine satellite datasets, bathymetric surveys are needed to estimate lake volumes more precisely because, even in similar geographic locations, lakes' sizes are not always equally predictable (Cook and Quincey 2015). Although there are numerous empirical equations devised for the estimation of the depth and volume of the lakes, there is always a chance of over or underestimation of these attributes. Hence bathymetric datasets can be extremely helpful in the estimation of the lake volume and the potential maximum discharge from a glacial lake in case of a GLOF event.

Mapping the societal elements of risk associated with the GLOF disaster is a largely ignored domain in the Himalayan region. At the national and state levels, GLOF risk profiles, that map the exposure and vulnerability of human life and property to this specific cryospheric danger must be produced and regularly updated. India lacks an early warning system infrastructure for the GLOF disaster even when the northern and the northeastern states of the country are under serious GLOF danger. Hence effective early warning systems need to be installed at critically hazardous glacial lakes that will help in evacuating the vulnerable population at the time of a future GLOF disaster and evading major risks associated with human life and key infrastructure such as the hydroelectric projects.

# 8. Conclusion

The glacier-lake interactions were studied for the Panikhar glacial lake and its feeding glacier for the past 22 years. We found that the glacial lake has undergone a remarkable expansion during this period. The area of the lake has increased by 0.37 km<sup>2</sup>, from

~0.10 km<sup>2</sup> in 2000 to ~0.47 km<sup>2</sup> in 2022, showing a net increase of 78.7%, at the rate of 0.017 km<sup>2</sup> per year while as its mother glacier has retreated significantly from ~4.63 km<sup>2</sup> in 2000 to ~4.02 km<sup>2</sup> in 2022 showing a total decrease of 13.2% in its total area i.e. 0.03 km<sup>2</sup> per annum. The glacier and glacial lake area plots show an inverse relationship which shows that the glacial lake is rapidly expanding at the expense of its mother glacier. The mass balance estimate of the Panikhar glacier also reveals a mass loss of 5.92 metric tons per square metre and an average thickness loss of 7.04 m over the past 22 years. The glacial lake is impounded by the terminal moraine of the glacier, rendering it hazardous, due to its swift rate of expansion and various other contextual factors. Notably, the presence of zones susceptible to potential mass movement in the surrounding areas also contributes to the heightened risk associated with this lake. The mean surface velocity and thickness of the glacier were estimated to be 3.38 m s<sup>-1</sup> and 30.95 m respectively. The potential outburst flood was modeled for two different GLOF scenarios using the HEC-RAS tool to generate flood depth and velocity profiles along the flow path for a distance of 25 km. The results reveal that the glacial lake is a potential threat to the downstream villages, especially the nearby Panikhar village. A total area of 5.38 km<sup>2</sup> which includes key infrastructure such as settlements, bridges, and roads is vulnerable to a potential GLOF event in the worst-case scenario. The routed hydrographs indicate that the flood wave generated at the time of an overtopping failure will arrive at the nearest settlement in 50 min with a peak velocity of 12.36 m/s. This study suggests regular monitoring of the lake and the installation of an early warning system (EWS) to mitigate and manage the risk from the lake in the future, especially at the time of an extreme weather event.

