
Sustained glacier melt in the Himalayas has gradually spawned more than 5,000 glacier lakes that are dammed by potentially unstable moraines. When such dams break, glacier lake outburst floods (GLOFs) can cause catastrophic societal and geomorphic impacts. We present a robust probabilistic estimate of average GLOFs return periods in the Himalayan region, drawing on 5.4 billion simulations. We find that the 100-y outburst flood has an average volume of  $33.5^{+3.7}/_{-3.7} \times 10^6 \text{ m}^3$  (posterior mean and 95% highest density interval [HDI]) with a peak discharge of  $15,600^{+\bar{2},000}/_{-1,800}~m^{\bar{3}}\cdot s^{-1}.$  Our estimated GLOF hazard is tied to the rate of historic lake outbursts and the number of present lakes, which both are highest in the Eastern Himalayas. There, the estimated 100-y GLOF discharge (~14,500 m<sup>3</sup>·s<sup>-1</sup>) is more than 3 times that of the adjacent Nyainqentanglha Mountains, and at least an order of magnitude higher than in the Hindu Kush, Karakoram, and Western Himalayas. The GLOF hazard may increase in these regions that currently have large glaciers, but few lakes, if future projected ice loss generates more unstable moraine-dammed lakes than we recognize today. Flood peaks from GLOFs mostly attenuate within Himalayan headwaters, but can rival monsoon-fed discharges in major rivers hundreds to thousands of kilometers downstream. Projections of future hazard from meteorological floods need to account for the extreme runoffs during lake outbursts, given the increasing trends in population, infrastructure, and hydropower projects in Himalayan headwaters.

atmospheric warming  $\mid$  meltwater lakes  $\mid$  GLOF  $\mid$  extreme-value statistics  $\mid$  Bayesian modeling

onsoonal floods are among the most destructive natural nonsonial moots are among the adjacent hazards in the greater Himalayan region and the adjacent hazards in the greater Himalayan region and the adjacent hazards in the greater Himalayan region and the adjacent hazards in the greater Himalayan region and the adjacent hazards in the greater Himalayan region and the adjacent hazards in the greater Himalayan region and the adjacent hazards in the greater Himalayan region and the adjacent hazards in the greater Himalayan region and the adjacent hazards in the greater Himalayan region and the adjacent hazards in the greater Himalayan region and the adjacent hazards in the greater Himalayan region and the adjacent hazards in the greater Himalayan region and the adjacent hazards in the greater Himalayan region and the adjacent hazards in the greater Himalayan region and the adjacent hazards in the greater Himalayan region and the adjacent hazards in the greater Himalayan region and the adjacent hazards in the greater Himalayan region and the adjacent hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater hazards in the greater haz mountain ranges of the Hindu Kush, Karakoram, Nyainqentanglha, and Hengduan Shan (Fig. 1). Regional projections for the lower Indus, Ganges, and Brahmaputra rivers hold that flood frequencies will rise noticeably in the 21st century (1, 2), putting the livelihoods of 220 million people at risk (3). In Himalayan headwaters, such prognoses have disregarded episodic, but potentially destructive, floods from the sudden emptying of morainedammed lakes. Such glacier lake outburst floods (GLOFs) occur largely independently of hydrometeorological floods, but can surpass their peak discharges by orders of magnitude in the upper river reaches (4-6). Glacier lakes dammed by abandoned moraines are susceptible to outburst, triggered by ice or debris falls, strong earthquake shaking, internal piping, or overtopping waves that exceed the shear resistance of the dam (7–9). These triggers mostly happen unrecorded in remote terrain, eroding the impounding barriers within minutes to hours, and releasing sediment-laden floods that may travel >100 km downstream (7). With little to no warning, communities and infrastructure downstream have often been caught unprepared, suffering loss of human lives and livestock, and damage to roads, buildings, and hydropower facilities (10-12). An objective and reproducible hazard assessment of such dam-break floods is key to human safety and sustainable development, and is repeatedly emphasized in research and media coverage of atmospheric warming, dwindling glaciers, and growing meltwater lakes (3, 13, 14).

GLOFs have gained growing attention in the Himalayas (15, 16), where these disasters have had the highest death toll worldwide

(17). While the distribution and dynamics of moraine-dammed lakes have been mapped extensively in recent years (12, 18–21), objectively appraising the current Himalayan GLOF hazard has remained challenging. The high-alpine conditions limit detailed fieldwork, leading researchers to extract proxies of hazard from increasingly detailed digital topographic data and satellite imagery. These data allow for readily measuring or estimating the geometry of ice and moraine dams, the possibility of avalanches or landslides entering a lake, or the water volumes released by outbursts (9, 18, 20). Ranking these diagnostics in GLOF hazard appraisals has mostly relied on expert judgment (18, 22), because triggers and conditioning factors are largely unknown for most historic GLOFs (23).

Guided by studies on earthquakes, landslides, wildfires, and floods, we use the magnitude and frequency of GLOFs in a given area and period as an objective metric of hazard. GLOFs have occurred at an average rate of  $\sim 1.3 \text{ y}^{-1}$  in the Himalayas in the past 3 decades (23), although of differing size, which is conventionally described by the released flood volume  $V_0$  or the associated peak discharge  $Q_p$ . These parameters are difficult to measure during dam failure but can be estimated eventually from the surface areas of glacier lakes. We thus scaled the manually mapped areas of all 5,184 Himalayan moraine-dammed lakes (>0.01 km<sup>2</sup>) to volumes using a Bayesian robust regression of maximum lake depth versus area from 24 bathymetrically surveyed lakes (Materials and Methods and SI Appendix, Fig. S2 and Table S1). Our approach assumes that all lakes are equally susceptible to outburst and that any incision depth is possible, which is consistent with data from Himalayan dam breaks (SI Appendix, Fig. S3). We used a Bayesian variant of a physical dam-break model (24, 25) to predict peak discharge  $Q_p$  from the product of  $V_0$  and the breach erosion rate k (Materials and Methods and SI Appendix, Figs. S4 and

## **Significance**

Glacier lake outburst floods (GLOFs) have become emblematic of a changing mountain cryosphere. The Himalayas suffered the highest losses from these sudden pulses of meltwater but lack a quantitative appraisal of GLOF hazard. We express the hazard from Himalayan glacier lakes by the peak discharge for a given return period. The 100-y GLOF has a mean discharge of ~15,600 m³·s⁻¹, comparable to monsoonal river discharges hundreds of kilometers downstream. The Eastern Himalayas are a hotspot of GLOF hazard that is 3 times higher than in any other Himalayan region. The size of growing glacier lakes and the frequency of lake outbursts determine GLOF hazard, which needs to be acknowledged better in flood hazard studies.

Author contributions: G.V. and O.K. designed research; G.V. and O.K. performed research; G.V. and O.K. analyzed data; and G.V., O.K., and A.W. wrote the paper.

The authors declare no competing interest.

This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.

Published under the PNAS license.

Data deposition: All input data are available at Zenodo (http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo. 3523213), and model codes are available at GitHub (https://github.com/geveh/GLOFhazard).

<sup>1</sup>To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: georg.veh@uni-potsdam.de.

This article contains supporting information online at https://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1914898117/-/DCSupplemental.

First published December 30, 2019.

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by IIT MUMBAI on August 8, 2025 from IP address 103.21.125.81

Image /page/1/Figure/1 description: A figure with three panels (A, B, C) illustrating the distribution and characteristics of moraine-dammed glacial lakes in the Himalayas. Panel A is the main map showing the study region, which includes the Hindu Kush, Karakoram, Western Himalaya, Central Himalaya, Eastern Himalaya, Nyainqen-tanglha, and Hengduan Shan mountain ranges. The map displays major rivers like the Indus, Ganges, Brahmaputra, and Yangtze, and cities such as Kabul, Islamabad, New Delhi, and Kathmandu. The distribution of lakes is shown using circles, where the size of the circle indicates the total lake area (with a key showing sizes for <3, 6, 12, 24, and 36 km²) and the color indicates the lake quantity (from 1 in light gray to 330 in dark blue). Yellow triangles mark the locations of Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) that occurred between 1935 and 2017. Panel B is an inset map showing the location of the study area within Asia, covering parts of India and China. Panel C is a histogram showing the frequency distribution of lake sizes. The x-axis represents lake size in square meters on a logarithmic scale (10^4, 10^5, 10^6), and the y-axis represents frequency, ranging from 0 to 500. The histogram shows that smaller lakes are most frequent, with the highest frequency (over 500) occurring for lakes around 10^4 to 2x10^4 m², and the frequency decreases as lake size increases.

Fig. 1. Moraine-dammed glacier lakes in the Himalayas. (A) Distribution of moraine-dammed lakes in our study region in 1° × 1° bins. Bubbles are scaled to the total lake area, and color-coded to abundance. Reported GLOFs (yellow triangles) have occurred most frequently in the past 8 decades in regions where glacier lakes are largest (23). (B) Location of the Himalayas between the Indian subcontinent and the Tibetan Plateau. (C) Histogram of glacier lake areas.

S5). In summary, we obtained  $4.6 \times 10^8$  and  $4.9 \times 10^9$  scenarios of  $V_0$  and  $Q_p$ , respectively, for all moraine-dammed lakes in the Himalayas. These numbers ensure that we have sufficiently explored the physically plausible space for fitting an extreme-value distribution to these key flood diagnostics. We further stacked our simulations, accounting for contemporary mean annual GLOF rates between 0.03 and 0.71 y<sup>-1</sup> in 7 subregions of the Himalayas, and estimated GLOF return periods in terms of the 100-y flood volume  $V_{100}$  and discharge  $Q_{p100}$  (Materials and Methods) (26, 27).

## Results

The predicted flood volumes and peak discharges span more than 7 orders of magnitude (Fig. 2). Based on a mean posterior rate of 1.26 GLOFs  $y^{-1}$  over the past 3 decades (23), we estimate a contemporary  $V_{100}$  of  $33.5^{+3.7}$ / $_{-3.7} \times 10^6$  m<sup>3</sup> s<sup>-1</sup> and  $Q_{\rm p100}$  of  $15,600^{+2,000}$ / $_{-1,800}$  m<sup>3</sup> s<sup>-1</sup> in the entire study area (Fig. 3). Regionally differing GLOF rates cause variation in  $V_{100}$  and  $Q_{\rm p100}$ . For example, GLOF hazard in the Eastern Himalayas is 350% ( $V_{100}$ ) and 338% ( $Q_{p100}$ ) higher than in the next highest region (Fig. 3 and SI Appendix, Fig. S6).

Correcting for regionally varying GLOF rates, we can explore how-for a fixed rate of one GLOF y-1-hazard changes as function of the lake size distribution (Fig. 4). We find that GLOF hazard in the Eastern Himalayas, which currently have the largest lakes and have had the highest GLOF activity in the past 3 decades (23), is on average more than 87% ( $V_{100}$ ) and 57% $(Q_{p100})$  higher than the estimate from the entire Himalayas. In contrast, the Western Himalayas had no known outburst from moraine-dammed lakes in the past 30 y, while the rate-adjusted  $V_{100}$  and  $Q_{\rm p100}$  there are still about 76% and 58% below that of the overall study area. In summary, these figures robustly support a contemporary hotspot of GLOF hazard in the southern Himalayas, mainly due to the larger abundance of glacier lakes and GLOFs in that part of the mountain belt.

## Discussion

We offer a consistent and reproducible estimate of present GLOF hazard in the Himalayas. Our Bayesian estimates explore the parameter space of plausible flood volumes and associated peak discharges with roughly a million outburst scenarios for any given lake. Our approach expands previous hazard appraisals by explicitly accounting for regionally varying GLOF rates. The estimated GLOF return periods are consistent with the frequency of reported flood volumes and discharges since 1935 (Fig. 3 and SI Appendix, Fig. S6 and Table S2). The 3 largest reported flood volumes of 71.6, 19.5, and  $17.2 \times 10^6$  m<sup>3</sup> from the lakes Sangwang Tsho (1954), Sabai Tsho (1998), and Lugge Tsho (1994), respectively, had return periods of 237, 56, and 49 y, respectively, according to our predictions. The highest reported peak discharge (15,920 m<sup>3</sup>·s<sup>-1</sup>) drained from Lake Zhangzangbo in 1981; we estimate this as a 100-y event in the greater Himalayan region. The lakes Sangwang Tsho and Sabai Tsho had similar high peak discharges of ~10,000 m<sup>3</sup>·s<sup>-1</sup>, corresponding to a return period of 60 y. Yet reported values of  $V_0$  and  $Q_p$  rely chiefly on point estimates from empirical rating curves, eyewitness accounts, flood marks, and transported clasts in river channels, or measurements several kilometers downstream of the failing dams (28). thus compromising detailed, site-specific validation of our regional predictions. These uncertainties cause some of the scatter in the data that we based our models on (SI Appendix, Figs. S4 and S5). However, our approach explicitly propagates these uncertainties and robustly estimates  $V_0$  and  $Q_p$  from the distribution of meltwater lake areas in the entire Himalayan region. The size of glacier lakes will remain the key determinant of GLOF magnitude, regardless of whether we use alternative discharge rating curves (SI Appendix, Fig. S7), more elaborate numerical dam breach simulations (29), or any other metric of flood potential (20).

Image /page/2/Figure/1 description: A vertical line of black text on a white background. The text is rotated 90 degrees counter-clockwise and is horizontally compressed, making it appear as a thin, dense line. The text reads: 'Downloaded from http://www.pnas.org by guest on August 8, 2023 from IP address 103.21.125.18.'

Image /page/2/Figure/2 description: A figure composed of eight scatter plots arranged in a 2x4 grid, labeled A through H. All plots share the same axes. The y-axis is labeled "Frequency density" and ranges logarithmically from 10⁻¹¹ to 10⁻¹. The x-axis is labeled "Peak discharge Qp [m³ s⁻¹] / Flood volume V₀ [m³]" and ranges logarithmically from 10⁻¹ to 10⁹. Each plot displays two data series: one with orange dots and one with dark blue dots. The orange series generally shows a decreasing trend from left to right. The blue series shows a distribution that peaks around 10³ to 10⁵ on the x-axis and then decreases. Each plot is labeled with a region and contains two numbers in gray text. The details for each plot are as follows:

Plot A: "All regions", numbers 5184 and 426.8.
Plot B: "Hindu Kush", numbers 650 and 30.9.
Plot C: "Karakoram", numbers 351 and 17.2.
Plot D: "Western Himalaya", numbers 688 and 30.8.
Plot E: "Central Himalaya", numbers 958 and 77.7.
Plot F: "Eastern Himalaya", numbers 1600 and 184.8.
Plot G: "Nyainqentanglha", numbers 415 and 41.7.
Plot H: "Hengduan Shan", numbers 527 and 44.

Fig. 2. Frequency densities of simulated GLOF flood volumes  $V_0$  and peak discharge  $Q_p$  for present Himalayan glacier lakes. Bubbles are log-binned densities of all simulations of flood volumes  $V_0$  (blue) and peak discharge  $Q_p$  (orange) in (A) the entire study area and (B–H) 7 subregions. Gray numbers are the number of lakes (top) and their surface areas (square kilometers) (bottom) for a given region.

Our study objectively enriches previous qualitative appraisals, which contrasted in the degree and number of "potentially dangerous" Himalayan lakes (22). The tails of the frequency–size distributions (Fig. 2) contain valuable information for practitioners regarding the physically possible margins of  $V_0$  and  $Q_p$  in the Himalayas. We note that half of the total Himalayan lake volume  $(20.1^{+2.4}/_{-2.1} \text{ km}^3)$  is in the largest 1% of glacier lakes (SI Appendix, Fig. S8). For example, Sangwang Tsho—the largest Himalayan moraine-dammed lake today—accounts for 5% of the total glacier lake volume ( $\sim 1 \text{ km}^3$ ) and could release a flood with a return period of  $5,000^{+1,400}/_{-1,000}$  y, should this volume drain entirely (SI Appendix, Fig. S9). Such flood magnitudes and associated return periods are consistent with reports on Holocene flood volumes up to 3 orders of magnitude larger in the eastern Himalayas (30).

Himalayan glacier lakes are currently limited in their storage capacity to produce floods of these dimensions, particularly in the Hindu Kush, Karakoram, and Western Himalayas, where lakes are smallest today (Figs. 1 and 2 and SI Appendix, Fig. S8). Why glacier lakes occur in clusters and have become largest in the Central and Eastern Himalayas since 1990 (+7.7 to +23% in area) remains debated (19). Glaciers have had negative mass balances in all regions except the Karakoram since the 1970s at least (31), while the highest ice losses in the 21st century were in the Western Himalaya and the Nyaingentanglha (32). The Central and Eastern Himalayas have a high proportion of lakes in direct contact with debris-covered parent glaciers, possibly accelerating glacier mass loss and lake growth (33). The increasing trend of air temperature is consistent over the entire Himalayas, whereas changes in precipitation were mostly insignificant (34), so that the clustering of lakes today may be tied to local, less well-known, controls such as glacier bed topography or valley geometry (35).

Yet the distribution of glacier lakes will likely change in the future, given that a global temperature rise of 1.5 °C could melt half of the Himalayan glacier mass by the end of the 21st century (36). Models of subglacial topography suggest that a complete melting of all glaciers might provide accommodation space for another 16,000 meltwater lakes (>10<sup>4</sup> m<sup>2</sup>) with a maximum total volume of 120 km<sup>3</sup> (37), hence possibly increasing the current lake volume 6-fold. According to these projections, most of these futures lakes could form in the Karakoram and Western Himalayas, where contemporary glacier cover is highest (13). Yet the errors of the inferred bathymetries can involve tens of meters, and many lakes might fill bedrock depressions that are less prone to catastrophic outbursts. Future flood volumes may increase nevertheless, especially in regions with large ice volumes and few lakes, even if only a fraction of the total meltwater will be trapped by moraines. Regional GLOF hazard could thus change commensurately, should annual GLOF frequencies rise with a growing lake abundance in the future (16). Whether lake outbursts will become more frequent with atmospheric warming remains an open question, however. The average rate of GLOFs in the greater Himalayan region has remained unchanged in the past 3 decades (23), showing that rapid growth of glacier lakes alone is an unsuitable predictor for GLOF activity, let alone GLOF hazard (38, 39).

Both the magnitude and frequency of outburst floods are straightforward to change in our model, motivating a more dynamic assessment with regular updates of outburst frequency and lake size distribution. We also encourage future work to learn more about the triggers and drivers of historic GLOFs. With more of this information becoming available, we can improve our Bayesian framework by assigning more informed (and appropriately weighted) prior probabilities of outburst to each glacier lake. In this spirit, we offer a practical tool that is extensible and

Image /page/3/Figure/1 description: A figure displaying estimated 100-year peak discharges from Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) in the greater Himalayan region. The figure includes a central map and eight surrounding line graphs.

The map shows the Tibetan Plateau and surrounding mountain ranges: Hindu Kush, Karakoram, Western Himalaya, Central Himalaya, Eastern Himalaya, Nyainqentanglha, and Hengduan Shan. It is populated with blue circles of varying sizes, representing peak discharge (Qp) in m³ s⁻¹, and white circles representing historical GLOFs.

Each of the eight line graphs plots peak discharge (Qp) on the y-axis against the return period in years on the x-axis. The y-axis ranges from 0 to 40,000 m³ s⁻¹, and the x-axis ranges from 2 to 200 years. Each graph shows an upward-curving blue line with a shaded confidence interval. The data for each region is as follows:

- \*\*Karakoram\*\*: Present Qp100 is 535 (+100, -113) m³ s⁻¹; GLOF rate is 0.06.
- \*\*Western Himalaya\*\*: Present Qp100 is 145 (+117, -166) m³ s⁻¹; GLOF rate is 0.03.
- \*\*Central Himalaya\*\*: Present Qp100 is 2,603 (+500, -433) m³ s⁻¹; GLOF rate is 0.19.
- \*\*Eastern Himalaya\*\*: Present Qp100 is 14,448 (+1,846, -1,891) m³ s⁻¹; GLOF rate is 0.71.
- \*\*Hindu Kush\*\*: Present Qp100 is 574 (+125, -106) m³ s⁻¹; GLOF rate is 0.06.
- \*\*Nyainqentanglha\*\*: Present Qp100 is 4,276 (+766, -720) m³ s⁻¹; GLOF rate is 0.23.
- \*\*Hengduan Shan\*\*: Present Qp100 is 2,529 (+515, -449) m³ s⁻¹; GLOF rate is 0.16.
- \*\*All regions\*\*: Present Qp100 is 15,609 (+2,013, -1,797) m³ s⁻¹; GLOF rate is 1.26.

Fig. 3. Estimated 100-y peak discharges from GLOFs in the greater Himalayan region. Circles on the map are present moraine-dammed lakes with colors coded and radii scaled to the modes of the predicted distributions of Q<sub>0</sub> for each lake. Plots show return periods of GLOF peak discharge for the entire study area (Lower Left) and its 7 subregions. Blue curves are estimated GLOF return periods, and numbers are the posterior mean 100-y flood discharge and 95% HDIs from 1,000 simulations for all 5,184 moraine-dammed lakes, calculated from the mean regional GLOF rate per region in the past 3 decades (brown). Thick dark blue lines are the means from 1,000 simulations (shades) drawing on sampled time series of 10,000 y each (Materials and Methods). Red ticks in Lower Left are average return periods of  $Q_p$  estimated for a sample of historic GLOFs since 1935 (SI Appendix, Table S2).

compatible with flood routing models, design codes, and hazard mitigation. Our appraisal of GLOF hazard complements projections of meteorological flood hazards in a warming climate for the sparsely instrumented Himalayan drainage network. Atmospheric warming is projected to increase mean daily and annual discharges in the Indus, Ganges, and Brahmaputra rivers only by a few percent in this century (40, 41), although the return periods for a given flood stage might drop by 50 to 90% in these rivers in the 21st century. Extreme runoff in headwaters (1), and GLOFs in particular (12), has eluded such projections. We show that

flood hazard due to glacier melt requires urgent attention in light of the rapidly growing population, infrastructure, and hydropower projects in the Himalayas (3, 12). Our appraisal adds to recent calls toward identifying regions that are most prone to GLOF impacts, and complements integrative concepts for climate risk adaptation on local, national, or regional levels (42).
